The Story of Egil Skallagrimsson - Wikisource, the free online library
The Story of Egil Skallagrimsson - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
The Story of Egil Skallagrimsson
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
The text of this work has been migrated to Index:The Story of Egil Skallagrimsson.djvu where it still requires clean up, formatting, and/or proofreading.
If you would like to help, please see Help:Proofread.
The Story of Egil Skallagrimsson  (1893)  by Snorri Sturluson, translated by W. C. Greensister projects: Wikipedia article, quotes, Wikidata item.
Snorri Sturluson1306063The Story of Egil Skallagrimsson1893W. C. Green
  This work is a translation and has a separate copyright status to the applicable copyright protections of the original content.
Original:
This work was published before January 1, 1927, and is in the public domain worldwide because the author died at least 100 years ago.
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
Translation:
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published before January 1, 1927. It may be copyrighted outside the U.S. (see Help:Public domain).
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
​
CHAPTER I.
Of Kveldulf and his sons.
 THERE was a man named Ulf, son of Bjalf, and Hallbera, daughter of Ulf the fearless; she was sister of Hallbjorn Half-giant in Hrafnista, and he the father of Kettle Hæing. Ulf was a man so tall and strong that none could match him, and in his youth he roved the seas as a freebooter. In fellowship with him was one Kari of Berdla, a man of renown for strength and daring; he was a Berserk. Ulf and he had one common purse, and were the dearest friends.
But when they gave up freebooting, Kari went to his estate at Berdla, being a man of great wealth. Three children had Kari, one son named Eyvind Lambi, another Aulvir Hnuf, and a daughter Salbjorg, who was a most beautiful woman of a noble spirit. Her did Ulf take to wife, and then he too went to his estates. Wealthy he was both in lands and chattels; he took baron's rank as his forefathers had done, and became a great man. It was told of Ulf that he was a great householder; it was his wont to rise up early, and then go round among his labourers or where his smiths were, and to overlook his stalk and fields, and at times he would talk with such as needed his counsel, and good counsel he could give in all things, for he was very wise. But everyday as evening drew on he became sullen, so that few could come to speak with him. He was an evening sleeper, and it was commonly said that he was very shape strong. He was called Kveldulf.
 ​
Kveldulf and his wife had two sons, the elder was named Thorolf, the younger Grim; these, when they grew up, were both tall men and strong, as was their father. But Thorolf was most comely as well as doughty, favoring his mother's kin; very cheery was he, liberal, impetuous in everything, a good trader, winning the hearts of all men. Grim was swarthy, ill-favoured, like his father both in face and mind; he became a good man of business; skilful was he in wood and iron, an excellent smith. In the winter he often went to the herring fishing, and with him many house-carles.
But when Thorolf was twenty years old, then he made him ready to go a harrying. Kveldulf gave him a long-ship, and Kari of Berdla's sons, Eyvind and Aulvir, resolved to go on that voyage, taking a large force and another long-ship; and they roved the seas in the summer, and got them wealth, and had a large booty to divide. For several summers they were out roving, but stayed at home in winter with their fathers. Thorolf brought home many costly things, and took them to his father and mother; thus they were well-to-do both for possessions and honour. Kveldulf was now well stricken in years, and his sons were grown men.
Chapter 2 - Of Aulvir Hnuf.
Audbjorn was then king over the Firthfolk; there was an earl of his named Hroald, whose son was Thorir. Atli the Slim was then an earl, he dwelt at Gaula; he had sons - Hallstein, Holmstein, and Herstein; and a daughter, Solveig the Fair. It happened one autumn that much people were gathered at Gaula for a sacrificial feast, then saw Aulvir Hnuf Solveig and courted her; he afterwards asked her to wife. But the earl thought him an unequal match and would not give her. Whereupon Aulvir composed many love-songs, and thought so much of Solveig that he left freebooting, but Thorolf and Eyvind Lambi kept it on. ​
Chapter 3 - The beginning of the rule of Harold Fairhair.
Harold, son of Halfdan Swarthy, was heir after his father. He had bound himself by this vow, not to let his hair be cut or combed till he were sole king over Norway, wherefore he was called Harold Shockhead. So first he warred with the kings nearest to him and conquered them, as is told at length elsewhere. Then he got possession of Upland; thence he went northwards to Throndheim, and had many battles there before he became absolute over all the Thronds. After that he purposed to go north to Naumdale to attack the brothers Herlaug and Hrollaug, kings of Naumdale. But when these brothers heard of his coming, Herlaug with twelve men entered the sepulchral mound which they had caused to be made (they were three winters at the making), and the mound then was closed after them. But king Hrollaug sank from royalty to earldom, giving up his kingdom and becoming a vassal of Harold. So Harold gained the Naumdalesmen and Halogaland, and he set rulers over his realm there. Then went he southwards with a fleet to Mæra and Raumsdale. But Solvi Bandy-legs, Hunthiof's son, escaped thence, and going to king Arnvid, in South Mæra, he asked help, with these words:
'Though this danger now touches us, before long the same will come to you; for Harold, as I ween, will hasten hither when he has enthralled and oppressed after his will all in North Mæra and Raumsdale. Then will the same need be upon you as was upon us, to guard your wealth and liberty, and to try everyone from whom you may hope for aid. And I now offer myself with my forces against this tyranny and wrong. But, if you make the other choice, you must do as the Naumdalesmen have done, and go of your own will into slavery, and become Harold's thralls. My father though it victory to die a king with honour ​rather than become in his old age another king's subject. Thou, as I judge, wilt think the same, and so will others who have any high spirit and claim to be men of valour.'
By such persuasion king Arnvid was determined to gather his forces and defend his land. He and Solvi made a league, and sent messengers to Audbjorn, king of the Firthfolk, that he should come and help them. Audbjorn, after counsel taken with friends, consented, and bade cut the war-arrow and send the war-summons throughout his realm, with word to his nobles that they should join him.
But when the king's messengers came to Kveldulf and told him their errand, and that the king would have Kveldulf come to him with all his house-carles, then answered he:
'It is my duty to the king to take the field with him if he have to defend his own land, and there be harrying against the Firthfolk; but this I deem clean beyond my duty, to go north to Mæra and defend their land. Briefly ye may say when ye meet your king that Kveldulf will sit at home during this rush to war, nor will he gather forces nor leave his home to fight with Harold Shockhead. For I think that he has a whole load of good-fortune where our king has not a handful.'
The messengers went back to the king, and told him how their errand had sped; but Kveldulf sat at home on his estates.
Chapter IV.
Battle of king Harold and Audbjorn.
 King Audbjorn went with his forces northwards to Mæra; there he joined king Arnvid and Solvi Bandy-legs, and altogether they had a large host. King Harold also had come from the north with his forces, and the armies met inside Solskel. There was fought a great battle, with much slaughter in either host. Of the Mærian forces fell the kings Arnvid and Audbjorn, but Solvi escaped, and afterwards became a great sea-rover, and wrought much scathe on Harold's kingdom, and was nicknamed Bandy-legs. ​On Harold's side fell two earls, Asgaut and Asbjorn, and two sons of earl Hacon, Grjotgard and Herlaug, and many other great men. After this Harold subdued South Mæra. Vemund Audbjorn's brother still retained the Firthfolk, being made king. It was now autumn, and king Harold was advised not to go south in autumn-tide. So he set earl Rognvald over North and South Mæra and Raumsdale, and kept a numerous force about himself.
That same autumn the sons of Atli set on Aulvir Hnuf at his home, and would fain have slain him. They had such a force that Aulvir could not withstand them, but fled for his life. Going northwards to Mæra, he there found Harold, and submitted to him, and went north with the king to Throndheim, and he became most friendly with him, and remained with him for a long time thereafter, and was made a skald.
In the winter following earl Rognvald went the inner way by the Eid-sea southwards to the Firths. Having news by spies of the movements of king Vemund, he came by night to Naust-dale, where Vemund was at a banquet, and, surrounding the house, burnt within it the king and ninety men. After that Karl of Berdla came to earl Rognvald with a long-ship fully manned, and they two went north to Mæra. Rognvald took the ships that had belonged to Vemund and all the chattels he could get. Kari of Berdla then went north to king Harold at Throndheim, and became his man.
Next spring king Harold went southwards along the coast with a fleet, and subdued firths and fells, and arranged for men of his own to rule them. Earl Hroald he set over the Firthfolk. King Harold was very careful, when he had gotten new peoples under his power, about barons and rich landowners, and all those whom he suspected of being at all likely to raise rebellion. Every such man he treated in one of two ways: he either made him become his liege-man, or go abroad; or (as a third choice) suffer yet harder conditions, some even losing life or limb. Harold claimed as his own through every district all patrimonies, and all land tilled or untilled, likewise all seas and freshwater lakes. All landowners were to be his tenants, as also all that ​worked in the forest, salt-burners, hunters and fishers by land and sea, all these owed him duty. But many fled abroad from this tyranny, and much waste land was then colonized far and wide, both eastwards in Jamtaland and Helsingjaland, and also the West lands, the Southern isles, Dublin in Ireland, Caithness in Scotland, and Shetland. And in that time Iceland was found.
Chapter 5 - The king's message to Kveldulf.
King Harold lay with his fleet in the Firths, whence he sent messengers round the land to such as had not come to him, but with whom he thought he had business. The messengers came to Kveldulf, and were well received. They set forth their errand, said that the king would have Kveldulf come to him.
'He has heard,' said they, 'that you are a man of renown and high family. You will get from him terms of great honour, for the king is very keen on this, to have with him such as he hears are men of mark for strength and bravery.'
Kveldulf answered that he was an old man, not fit for war or to be out in warships. 'I will now,' said he, 'sit at home and leave serving kings.'
Upon this the messengers said, 'Then let your son go to the king; he is a tall man and a likely warrior. The king will make you a baron,' said they to Grim, 'if you will serve him.'
'I will be made baron under none,' said Grim, 'while my father lives; he, while he lives, shall be my liege-lord.'
The messengers went away, and when they came to the king told him all that Kveldulf had said before them. Whereat the king looked sullen, but he spoke little; these men, he said, were proud, or what were they aiming at? Aulvir Hnuf was standing near, and he bade the king not be wroth. 'I will go,' said he, 'to Kveldulf; and he will ​consent to come to you, as soon as he knows that you think it a matter of moment.'
So Aulvir went to Kveldulf and told him that the king was wroth, and it would not go well unless one of the two, father or son, came to the king; he said, too, that he would get them great honour from the king if they would but pay homage. Further he told them at length, as was true, that the king was liberal to his men both in money and in honours.
Kveldulf said, 'My foreboding is that I and my sons shall get no luck from this king: and I will not go to him. But if Thorolf returns this summer, he will be easily won to this journey, as also to be made the king's man. Say you this to the king, that I will be his friend, and will keep to his friendship all who heed my words; I will also hold the same rule and authority from his hand that I held before from the former king, if he will that it continue so still, and I will see how I and the king agree.'
Then Aulvir went back and told the king that Kveldulf would send him his son, and he (said Aulvir) would suit better; but he was not then at home. The king let the matter rest. In the summer he went inland to Sogn, but in autumn made ready to go northwards to Throndheim.
Chapter 6 - Thorolf resolves to serve the king.
Thorolf Kveldulf's son and Eyvind Lambi came home from sea-roving in the autumn. Thorolf went to his father, and father and son had some talk together. Thorolf asked what had been the errand of the men whom Harold sent thither. Kveldulf said the king had sent them with this message, that Kveldulf or else one of his sons should become his man.
'How answeredst thou?' said Thorolf.
'I spake what was in my mind, that I would never take service with king Harold; and ye two will both do the ​same, if I may counsel: this I think will be the end, that we shall reap ruin from that king.'
'That,' said Thorolf, 'is quite contrary to what my mind tells me, for I think I shall get from him much advancement. And on this I am resolved, to seek the king, and become his man; and this I have learnt for true, that his guard is made up of none but valiant men. To join their company, if they will have me, seems to me most desirable; these men are in far better case than all others in the land. And 'tis told me of the king that he is most generous in money gifts to his men, and not slow to give them promotion and to grant rule to such as he deems meet for it. Whereas I hear this about all that turn their backs upon him and pay him not homage with friendship, that they all become men of nought, some flee abroad, some are made hirelings. It seems wonderful to me, father, in a man so wise and ambitious as thou art, that thou wouldst not thankfully take the dignity which the king offered thee. But if thou thinkest that thou hast prophetic foresight of this, that we shall get misfortune from this king, and that he will be our enemy, then why didst thou not go to battle against him with that king in whose service thou wert before? Now, methinks it is most unreasonable neither to be his friend nor his enemy.'
'It went,' said Kveldulf, 'just as my mind foreboded, that they marched not to victory who went northwards to fight with Harold Shockhead in Mæra; and equally true will this be, that Harold will work much scathe on my kin. But thou, Thorolf, wilt take thine own counsel in thine own business; nor do I fear, though thou enter into the company of Harold's guards, that thou wilt not be thought capable and equal to the foremost in all proofs of manhood. Only beware of this, keep within bounds, nor rival thy betters; thou wilt not, I am sure, yield to others overmuch.'
But when Thorolf made him ready to go, Kveldulf accompanied him down to the ship and embraced him, with wishes for his happy journey and their next merry meeting. ​
Chapter 7
Of Bjorgolf, Brynjolf, Bard, and Hildirida.
 There was a man in Halogaland named Bjorgolf; he dwelt in Torgar. He was a baron, powerful and wealthy; in strength, stature, and kindred half hill-giant. He had a son named Brynjolf, who was like his father. Bjorgolf was now old, and his wife was dead; and he had given over into his son's hands all business, and found him a wife, Helga, daughter of Kettle Hæing of Hrafnista. Their son was named Bard; he soon grew to be tall and handsome, and became a right doughty man.
One autumn there was a banquet where many men were gathered, Bjorgolf and his son being there the most honourable guests. In the evening they were paired off by lot to drink together, as the old custom was. Now, there was at the banquet a man named Hogni, owner of a farm in Leka, a man of great wealth, very handsome, shrewd, but of low family, who had made his own way. He had a most beautiful daughter, Hildirida by name; and it fell to her lot to sit by Bjorgolf. They talked much together that evening, and the fair maiden charmed the old man. Shortly afterwards the banquet broke up.
That same autumn old Bjorgolf journeyed from home in a cutter of his own, with thirty men aboard. He came to Leka, and twenty of them went up to the house, while ten guarded the ship. When they came to the farm, Hogni went out to meet him, and made him welcome, invited him and his comrades to lodge there, which offer Bjorgolf accepted, and they entered the room. But when they had doffed their travelling clothes and donned mantles, then Hogni gave orders to bring in a large bowl of beer; and Hildirida, the daughter of the house, bare ale to the guests.
Bjorgolf called to him Hogni the goodman, and said, 'My errand here is this: I will have your daughter to go home with me, and will even now make with her a hasty wedding.'
 ​
Hogni saw no choice but to let all be as Bjorgolf would; so Bjorgolf bought her with an ounce of gold, and they became man and wife, and Hildirida went home with Bjorgolf to Torgar. Brynjolf showed him ill-pleased at this business. Bjorgolf and Hildirida had two sons; one was named Harek, the other Hærek.
Soon after this Bjorgolf died; but no sooner was he buried than Brynjolf sent away Hildirida and her sons. She went to her father at Leka, and there her sons were brought up. They were good-looking, small of stature, naturally shrewd, like their mother's kin. They were commonly called Hildirida's sons. Brynjolf made little count of them, and did not let them inherit aught of their father's. Hildirida was Hogni's heiress, and she and her sons inherited from him and dwelt in Leka, and had plenty of wealth. Bard, Brynjolf's son, and Hildirida's sons were about of an age.
Bjorgolf and his son Brynjolf had long held the office of going to the Finns, and collecting the Finns' tribute.
Northwards, in Halogaland is a firth called Vefsnir, and in the firth lies an island called Alost, a large island and a good, and in this a farm called Sandness. There dwelt a man named Sigurd, the richest man thereabouts in the north; he was a baron, and wise of understanding. He had a daughter named Sigridr; she was thought the best match in Halogaland, being his only child and sole heiress to her father. Bard Brynjolf's son journeyed from home with a cutter and thirty men aboard northwards to Alost, and came to Sigurd at Sandness. There he declared his business, and asked Sigridr to wife. This offer was well received and favourable answered, and so it came about that Bard was betrothed to the maiden. The marriage was to take place the next summer. Bard was then to come north for the wedding. ​
Chapter 8 - Of Bard and Thorolf.
King Harold had that summer sent word to the men of power that were in Halogaland, summoning to him such as had not come to him before. Brynjolf resolved to go, and with him Bard his son; and in the autumn they went southwards to Throndheim, and there met the king. He received them most gladly. Brynjolf was made a baron of the king's; the king also gave him large grants beside what he had before. He gave him withal the right of journey to the Finns, with the king's business on the fells and the Finn traffic. Then Brynjolf went away home to his estate, but Bard remained, and was made one of the king's guard.
Of all his guard the king most prized his skalds; they occupied the second high seat. Of these Audun Ill-skald sat innermost, being the oldest; he had been skald to Halfdan Swarthy, king Harold's father. Next to him sat Thorbjorn Raven, then Aulvir Hnuf, and next to him was placed Bard; he was there by-named Bard the White or Bard the Strong. He was in honour with everyone there, but between him and Aulvir Hnuf was a close friendship.
That same autumn came to king Harold Thorolf Kveldulf's son and Eyvind Lambi, Kari of Berdla's son, and they were well received. They brought thither a swift twenty-benched long-ship well manned, which they had before used in sea-roving. They and their company were placed in the guest-hall; but when they had waited there till they thought it a fit time to go before the king, Kari of Berdla and Aulvir Hnuf went in with them. They greeted the king. Then said Aulvir Hnuf, 'Here is come Kveldulf's son, whom I told thee in the summer Kveldulf would send. His promise to thee will now stand fast; for here thou canst see true tokens that he will be thy friend in all when he hath sent his son hither to take service with thee, a stalwart man as thou mayest see. Now, this is the boon ​craved by Kveldulf and by us all, that thou receive Thorolf with honour and make him a great man with thee.'
The king answered his words well, promising that so he would do, 'If,' said he, 'Thorolf proves himself as accomplished in deed as he is right brave in look.'
After this Thorolf was made of the king's household, and one of his guard.
But Kari of Berdla and his son Eyvind Lambi went back south in the ship which Thorolf had brought north, and so home to Kari's farm. Thorolf remained with the king, who appointed him a seat between Aulvir Hnuf and Bard; and these three struck up a close friendship. And all men said of Thorolf and Bard that they were a well-matched pair for comeliness, stature, strength, and all doughty deeds. And both were in high favour with the king.
But when winter was past and summer came, then Bard asked leave to go and see to the marriage promised to him the summer before. And when the king knew that Bard's errand was urgent, he allowed him to go home. Then Bard asked Thorolf to go north with him, saying (as was true) that he would meet there many of his kin, men of renown, whom he had not yet seen or known. Thorolf thought this desirable, so they got leave from the king for this; then they made them ready, took a good ship and crew, and went their way.
When they came to Torgar, they sent word to Sigurd that Bard would now see to that marriage on which they had agreed the summer before. Sigurd said that he would hold to all that they had arranged; so they fixed the wedding-day, and Bard with his party were to come north to Sandness. At the appointed time Brynjolf and Bard set out, and with them many great men of their kin and connexions. And it was as Bard had said, that Thorolf met there many of his kinsmen that he had not known before. They journeyed to Sandness, and there was held the most splendid feast. And when the feast was ended, Bard went home with his wife, and remained at home through the summer, and Thorolf with him.
In the autumn they came south to the king, and were ​with him another winter. During that winter Brynjolf died; and when Bard learnt that the inheritance there was open for him, he asked leave to go home. This the king granted, and before they parted Bard was made a baron, as his father had been, and held of the king all those same grants that Brynjolf had held. Bard went home to his estate, and at once became a great chief; but Hildirida's sons got no more of the heritage than before. Bard had a son by his wife; he was named Grim. Meanwhile Thorolf was with the king, and in great honour.
Chapter 9 - Battle in Hafr's Firth.
King Harold proclaimed a general levy, and gathered a fleet, summoning his forces far and wide through the land. He went out from Throndheim, and bent his course southwards, for he had heard that a large host was gathered throughout Agdir, Rogaland, and Hordaland, assembled from far, both from the inland parts above, and from the east out of Vik, and many great men were there met who purposed to defend their land from the king. Harold held on his way from the north, with a large force, having his guards on board. In the forecastle of the king's ship were Thorolf Kveldulfsson, Bard the White, Kari of Berdla's sons, Aulvir Hnuf and Eyvind Lambi, and in the prow were twelve Berserks of the king.
The fleets met south in Rogaland in Hafr's Firth. There was fought the greatest battle that king Harold had had, with much slaughter in either host. The king set his own ship in the van, and there the battle was most stubborn, but the end was that king Harold won the victory. Thorir Longchin, king of Agdir, fell there, but Kjotvi the wealthy fled with all his men that could stand, save some that surrendered after the battle. When the roll of Harold's army was called, many were they that had fallen, and many were sore wounded. Thorolf was badly wounded, Bard ​even worse; nor was there a man unwounded in the king's ship before the mast, except those whom iron bit not to wit the Berserks.
Then the king had his men's wounds bound up, and thanked them for their valour, and gave them gifts, adding most praise where he thought it most deserved. He promised them also further honour, naming some to be steersmen, others forecastle men, others bow-sitters. This was the last battle king Harold had within the land; after this none withstood him; he was supreme over all Norway.
The king saw to the healing of his men, whose wounds gave them hope of life, as also to the burial of the dead with all customary honours. Thorolf and Bard lay wounded. Thorolf's wounds began to heal, but Bard's proved mortal. Then Bard had the king called to him, and spoke thus:
'If it so be that I die of these wounds, then I would ask this of thee, that I may myself name my heir.'
To this when the king assented, then said he:
'I will that Thorolf my friend and kinsman take all my heritage, both lands and chattels. To him, also, will I give my wife and the bringing up of my son, because I trust him for this above all men.'
This arrangement he made fast, as the law was, with the leave of the king. Then Bard died, and was buried, and his death was much mourned. Thorolf was healed of his wounds, and followed the king, and had won great glory.
In the autumn the king went north to Throndheim. Then Thorolf asked to go north to Halogaland, to see after those gifts which he had received in the summer from his kinsman Bard. The king gave leave for this, adding a message and tokens that Thorolf should take all that Bard had given him, showing that the gift was with the counsel of the king, and that he would have it so. Then the king made Thorolf a baron, and granted him all the rights which Bard had had before, giving him the journey to the Finns on the same terms. He also supplied to Thorolf a good long-ship, with tackling complete, and had everything made ready for his journey thence in the best possible way. So Thorolf set out, and he and the king parted with great affection. ​
But when Thorolf came north to Torgar, he was well received. He told them of Bard's death; also how Bard had left him both lands and chattels, and her that had been his wife; then he showed the king's order and tokens. When Sigridr heard these tidings, she felt her great loss in her husband, but with Thorolf she was already well acquainted, and knew him for a man of great mark; and this promise of her in marriage was good, and besides there was the king's command. So she and her friends saw it to be the best plan that she should be betrothed to Thorolf, unless that were against her father's mind. Thereupon Thorolf took all the management of the property, and also the king's business.
Soon after this Thorolf started with a long-ship and about sixty men, and coasted northwards, till one day at eventide he came to Sandness in Alost; there they moored the ship. And when they had raised their tent, and made arrangements, Thorolf went up to the farm buildings with twenty men. Sigurd received him well, and asked him to lodge there, for there had been great intimacy between them since the marriage connection between Sigurd and Bard. Then Thorolf and his men went into the hall, and were there entertained. Sigurd sat and talked with Thorolf, and asked tidings. Thorolf told of the battle fought that summer in the south, and of the fall of many men whom Sigurd knew well, and withal how Bard his son-in-law had died of wounds received in the battle. This they both felt to be a great loss. Then Thorolf told Sigurd what had been the covenant between him and Bard before he died, and he declared also the orders of the king, how he would have all this hold good, and this he showed by the tokens.
After this Thorolf entered on his wooing with Sigurd, and asked Sigridr, his daughter, to wife. Sigurd received the proposal well; he said there were many reasons for this; first, the king would have it so; next, Bard had asked it; and further he himself knew Thorolf well, and thought it a good match for his daughter. Thus Sigurd was easily won to grant this suit; whereupon the betrothal was made, and the wedding was fixed for the autumn at Torgar.
Then Thorolf went home to his estate, and his comrades ​with him. There he prepared a great feast, and bade many thereto. Of Thorolf's kin many were present, men of renown. Sigurd also came thither from the north with a long-ship and a chosen crew. Numerously attended was that feast, and it was at once seen that Thorolf was free-handed and munificent. He kept about him a large following, whereof the cost was great, and much provision was needed; but the year was good, and needful supplies were easily found.
During that winter Sigurd died at Sandness, and Thorolf was heir to all his property; this was great wealth.
Now the sons of Hildirida came to Thorolf, and put in the claim which they thought they had on the property that had belonged to their father Bjorgolf. Thorolf answered them thus:
'This I knew of Brynjolf, and still better of Bard, that they were men so generous that they would have let you have of Bjorgolf's heritage what share they knew to be your right. I was present when ye two put in this same claim on Bard, and I heard what he thought, that there was no ground for it, for he called you illegitimate.'
Harek said that they would bring witnesses that their mother was duly bought with payment.
'It is true that we did not at first treat of this matter with Brynjolf our brother it was a case of sharing between kinsmen, but of Bard we hoped to get our dues in every respect, though our dealings with him were not for long. Now however this heritage has come to men who are in nowise our kin, and we cannot be altogether silent about our wrong; but it may be that, as before, might will so prevail that we get not our right of thee in this, if thou refuse to hear the witness that we can bring to prove us honourably born.'
Thorolf then answered angrily:
'So far am I from thinking  you legitimate heirs that I am told your mother was taken by force, and carried home as a captive.'
After that they left talking altogether.
Chapter 10 - Thorolf ​
CHAPTER X.
Thorolf in Finmark.
 In the winter Thorolf took his way up to the fells with a large force of not less than ninety men, whereas before it had been the wont of the king's stewards to have thirty men, and sometimes fewer. He took with him plenty of wares for trading. At once he appointed a meeting with the Finns, took of them the tribute, and held a fair with them. All was managed with goodwill and friendship, though not without fear on the Finns' side. Far and wide about Finmark did he travel; but when he reached the fells eastward, he heard that the Kylfings were come from the east, and were there for trading with the Finns, but in some places for plunder also. Thorolf set Finns to spy out the movements of the Kylfings, and he followed after to search for them, and came upon thirty men in one den, all of whom he slew, letting none escape. Afterwards he found together fifteen or twenty. In all they slew near upon a hundred, and took immense booty, and returned in the spring after doing this.
Thorolf then went to his estates at Sandness, and remained there through the spring. He had a long-ship built, large, and with a dragon's head, fitted out in the best style; this he took with him from the north. Thorolf gathered great stores of what there was in Halogaland, employing his men after the herrings and in other fishing; seal-hunting there was too in abundance, and egg-gathering, and all such provision he had brought to him. Never had he fewer freedmen about his home than a hundred; he was open-handed and liberal, and readily made friends with the great, and with all that were near him. A mighty man he became, and he bestowed much care on his ships, equipment, and weapons.
​
CHAPTER XI.
The king feasts with Thorolf.
 King Harold went that summer to Halogaland, and banquets were made ready against his coming, both where his estates were, and also by barons and powerful landowners. Thorolf prepared a banquet for the king at great cost; it was fixed for when the king should come there. To this he bade a numerous company, the best men that could be found. The king had about three hundred men with him when he came to the banquet, but Thorolf had five hundred present. Thorolf had caused a large granary to be fitted up where the drinking should be, for there was no hall large enough to contain all that multitude. And all around the building shields were hung.
The king sate in the high seat; but when the foremost bench was filled, then the king looked round, and he turned red, but spoke not, and men thought they could see he was angry. The banquet was magnificent, and all the viands of the best. The king, however, was gloomy; he remained there three nights, as had been intended. On the day when the king was to leave Thorolf went to him, and offered that they should go together down to the strand. The king did so, and there, moored off the land, floated that dragon-ship which Thorolf had had built, with tent and tackling complete. Thorolf gave the ship to the king, and prayed the king to believe that he had gathered such numbers for this end, to show the king honour, and not to enter into rivalry with him. The king took Thorolf's words well, and then became merry and cheerful. Many added their good word, saying (as was true) that the banquet was most splendid, and the farewell escort magnificent, and that the king gained much strength by such men. Then they parted with much affection. 
The king went northwards through Halogaland as he had purposed, and returned south as summer wore on. He went to yet other banquets there that were prepared for him. ​
Chapter 12
Hildirida's sons talk with Harold.
 Hildirida's sons went to the king and bade him to a three nights' banquet. The king accepted their bidding, and fixed when he would come. So at the appointed time he and his train came thither. The company was not numerous, but the feast went off very well, and the king was quite cheerful. Harek entered into talk with the king, and their talk turned on this, that he asked about the king's journeys in those parts during the summer. 
The king answered his questions, and said that all had received him well, each after his means. 
'Great will have been the difference,' said Harek, 'and at Torgar the company at the banquet will have been the most numerous.'
The king said that it was so.
Harek said: 'That was to be looked for, because on that banquet most was spent; and thou, O king, hadst great luck in matters so turning out that thy life was not endangered. The end was as was likely; thou wert very wise and very fortunate; for thou at once suspectedst all was not for good on seeing the numerous company there gathered; but (as I am told) thou madest all thy men remain armed constantly and keep watch and ward night and day.'
The king looked at him and said: 'Why speakest thou thus, Harek? What canst thou tell of this?'
Harek answered: 'May I speak with permission what I please?'
'Speak,' said the king.
'This I judge,' said Harek, 'that thou wouldst not deem it to be well, if thou, O king, heardest every one's words, what men say when speaking their minds freely at home, how they think that it is a tyranny thou exercisest over all people. But the plain truth is, O king, that to rise against thee the people lack nothing but boldness and a leader. Nor is it wonderful in a man like Thorolf that he thinks himself above everyone; he wants not for strength and ​comeliness; he keeps a guard round him like a king; he has wealth in plenty, even though he had but what is truly his, but besides that he holds others' property equally at his disposal with his own. Thou, too, hast bestowed on him large grants, and he had now made all ready to repay them with ill. For this is the truth that I tell thee: when it was learnt that thou wert coming north to Halogaland with no more force than three hundred men, the counsel of people here was that an army should assemble and take thy life, O king, and the lives of all thy force. And Thorolf was head of these counsels, and it was offered him that he should be king over the Halogalanders and Naumdalesmen. Then he went in and out of each firth and round all the islands, and got together every man he could find and every weapon, and it was no secret that this army was to muster for battle against king Harold. But the truth is, O king, that though thou hadst somewhat less force than those who met thee, yet the farmer folk took flight when they saw thy fleet. Then this counsel was adopted, to meet thee with friendly show and bid thee to a banquet: but it was intended, when thou wert well drunk and lying asleep, to attack thee with fire and weapon. And here is a proof whether I am rightly informed; ye were led into a granary because Thorolf was loth to burn up his new and beautiful hall; and a further proof is that every room was full of weapons and armour. But when all their devices against thee miscarried, then they chose the best course they could; they hushed up their former purpose. And I doubt not that all may deny this counsel, because few, methinks, know themselves guiltless, were the truth to come out. Now this is my counsel, O king, that thou keep Thorolf near thee, and let him be in thy guard, and bear thy standard, and be in the forecastle of thy ship; for this duty no man is fitter. Or if thou wilt have him to be a baron, then give him a grant southwards in the Firths, where are all his family: thou mayest then keep an eye on him, that he make not himself too great for thee. But the business here in Halogaland put thou into the hands of men who are moderate and will serve thee faithfully, and have kinsfolk here, men whose relatives have had the same work here before. We two brothers are ready and willing for such service as thou wilt ​use us in; our father long had the king's business here, and it prospered in his hands. It is difficult, O king, to place men as managers here, because thou wilt seldom come hither thyself. The strength of the land is too little to need thy coming with an army, yet thou must not come hither again with few followers, for there are here many disloyal people.'
The king was very angry at these words, but he spoke quietly, as was always his wont when he heard tidings of great import. He asked whether Thorolf were at home at Torgar. Harek said this was not likely.
'Thorolf,' said he, 'is too wise to be in the way of thy followers, O king, for he must guess that all will not be so close but thou wilt get to know these things. He went north to Alost as soon as he heard that thou wert on thy way south.'
The king spoke little about this matter before other men; but it was easy to see that he inclined to believe the words that had been spoken.
After this the king went his way, Hildirida's sons giving him honourable escort with gifts at parting, while he promised them his friendship. The brothers made themselves an errand into Naumdale, and so went round about as to cross the king's path now and again; he always received their words well.
Chapter 13
Thorgils goes to the king.
 There was a man named Thorgils Yeller, a house-carle of Thorolf's, honoured above all the rest of his household; he had followed Thorolf in his roving voyages as fore-castle man and standard-bearer. He had been in Hafr's Firth, in the fleet of king Harold, and was then steering the very ship that Thorolf had used in his roving. Thorgils was strong of body and right bold of heart; the king had bestowed on him friendly gifts after the battle, and promised him his friendship. Thorgils was manager at Torgar, and bore rule there when Thorolf was not at home. ​
Before Thorolf went away this time he had counted over all the king's tribute that he had brought from the fells, and he put it in Thorgils' hand, bidding him convey it to the king, if he himself came not home before the king returned south. So Thorgils made ready a large ship of burden belonging to Thorolf, and put the tribute on board, and taking about twenty men sailed southward after the king, and found him in Naumdale. 
But when Thorgils met the king he gave him greeting from Thorolf, and said that he was come thither with the Finns' tribute sent by Thorolf. The king looked at him, but answered never a word, and all saw that he was angry. Thorgils then went away, thinking to find a better time to speak with the king; he sought Aulvir Hnuf, and told him what had passed, and asked him if he knew what was the matter.
'That do I not,' said he; 'but this I have marked, that, since we were at Leka, the king is silent every time Thorolf is mentioned, and I suspect he has been slandered. This I know of Hildirida's sons, that they were long in conference with the king, and it is easy to see from their words that they are Thorolf's enemies. But I will soon be certain about this from the king himself.'
Thereupon Aulvir went to the king, and said: 'Here is come Thorgils Yeller thy friend, with the tribute which is thine; and the tribute is much larger than it has been before, and far better wares. He is eager to be on his way; be so good, O king, as to go and see it; for never have been seen such good gray furs.'
The king answered not, but he went to where the ship lay. Thorgils at once set forth the furs and showed them to the king. And when the king saw that it was true, that the tribute was much larger and better, his brows somewhat cleared, and Thorgils got speech with him. He brought the king some bearskins which Thorolf sent him, and other valuables besides, which he had gotten upon the fells. So the king brightened up, and asked tidings of the journey of Thorolf and his company. Thorgils told it all in detail.
Then said the king: 'Great pity is it Thorolf should be unfaithful to me and plot my death.'
Then answered many who stood by, and all with one ​mind, that it was a slander of wicked men if such words had been spoken, and Thorolf would be found guiltless. The king said he would prefer to believe this. Then was the king cheerful in all his talk with Thorgils, and they parted friends. 
But when Thorgils met Thorolf he told him all that had happened.
Chapter 14
Thorolf again in Finmark.
 That winter Thorolf went again to Finmark, taking with him about a hundred men. As before, he held a fair with the Finns, and travelled far and wide over Finmark. But when he reached the far east, and his coming was heard of, then came to him some Kvens, saying that they were sent by Faravid, king of Kvenland, because the Kiriales were harrying his land; and his message was that Thorolf should go thither and bear him help; and further that Thorolf should have a share of the booty equal to the king's share, and each of his men as much as two Kvens. With the Kvens the law was that the king should have one-third as compared with his men when the booty was shared, and beyond that, as reserved for him, all bearskins and sables. Thorolf put this proposal before his men, giving them the choice to go or not; and the more part chose to venture it, as the prize was so great. This is was decided that they should go eastwards with the messengers.
Finmark is a wide tract; it is bounded westwards by the sea, wherefrom large firths run in; by sea also northwards and round to the east; but southwards lies Norway; and Finmark stretches along nearly all the inland region to the south, as also does Halogaland outside. But eastwards from Naumdale is Jamtaland, then Helsingjaland and Kvenland, then Finland, then Kirialaland; along all these lands to the north lies Finmark, and there are wide inhabited fell-districts, some in dales, some by lakes. The lakes of Finmark are wonderfully large, and by the lakes there are extensive forests. But high fells lie behind from end to end of the Mark, and this ridge is called Keels.
 ​But when Thorolf came to Kvenland and met king Faravid, they made them ready for their march, being three hundred of the kings men and a fourth hundred Norsemen. And they went by the upper way over Finmark, and came where the Kiriales were on the fell, the same who had before harried the Kvens. These, when they were aware of the enemy, gathered themselves and advanced to meet them, expecting victory as heretofore. But, on the battle being joined, the Norsemen charged furiously forwards, bearing shields stronger than those of the Kvens; the slaughter turned to be in the Kiriales' ranks many fell, some fled. King Faravid and Thorolf took there immense wealth of spoil, and returned to Kvenland, whence afterwards Thorolf and his men came to Finmark, he and Faravid parting in friendship.
Thorolf came down from the fell to Vefsnir; then went first to his farm at Sandness, stayed there awhile, and in spring went with his men north to Torgar.
But when he came there, it was told him how Hildirida's sons had been that winter at Throndheim with king Harold, and that they would not spare to slander Thorolf with the king; and it was much questioned what grounds they had had for their slander. Thorolf answered thus: 'The king will not believe this, though such lies be laid before him; for there are no grounds for my turning traitor to him, when he has done me much good and no evil. And so far from wishing to do him harm (though I had the choice), I would much rather be a baron of his than be called king, when some other fellow-countrymen might rise and make me his thrall.'
Chapter 15
King Harold and Harek.
 Hildirida's sons had been that winter with king Harold, and in their company twelve men of their own household and neighbours. The brothers were often talking with the king, and they still spoke in the same way ​of Thorolf. Harek asked: 'Didst thou like well, O king, the Finns' tribute which Thorolf sent thee?'
'I did,' said the king.
'Then wouldst thou have been surprised,' said he, 'if thou hadst received all that belonged to thee! But it was far from being so; Thorolf kept for himself the larger share. He sent thee three bearskins, but I know for certain that he kept back thirty that were by right thine; and I guess it was the same with other things. This will prove true, O king, that, if thou put the stewardship into the hand of myself and my brother, we shall bring thee more wealth.'
And to all that they said about Thorolf their comrades bore witness, wherefore the king was exceeding angry.
Chapter XVI.
Thorolf and the king.
 In the summer Thorolf went south to king Harold at Throndheim, taking with him all the tribute and much wealth besides, and ninety men well arrayed. When he came to the king, he and his were placed in the guest-hall and entertained magnificently.
On the morrow Aulvir Hnuf went to his kinsman Thorolf; they talked together, Aulvir saying that Thorolf was much slandered, and the king gave ear to such tales. Thorolf asked Aulvir to plead his cause with the king, 'for,' said he, 'I shall be short-spoken before the king if he choose rather to believe the lies of wicked men than truth and honesty which he will find in me.'
The next day Aulvir came to see Thorolf, and told him he had spoken on his business with the king; 'but,' said he, 'I know no more than before what is in his mind.'
'Then must I myself go to him,' said Thorolf.
He did so; he went to the king where he sat at meat, and when he came in he greeted the king. The king accepted his greeting, and bade them serve him with drink. Thorolf said that he had there the tribute belonging to the ​king from Finmark; 'and yet a further portion of booty have I brought as a present to thee, O king. And what I bring will, I know, owe all its worth to this, that it is given out of gratitude to thee.'
The king said that he could expect nought but good from Thorolf, 'because,' said he, 'I deserve nought else; yet men tell two tales of thee as to thy being careful to win my approval.'
'I am not herein justly charged,' said Thorolf, 'if any say I have shown disloyalty to thee. This I think, and with truth: That they who speak such lying slanders of me will prove to be in nowise thy friends, but it is quite clear that they are my bitter enemies; 'tis likely, however, that they will pay dearly for it if we come to deal together.'
Then Thorolf went away.
But on the morrow Thorolf counted out the tribute in the king's presence; and when it was all paid, he then brought out some bearskins and sables, which he begged the king to accept. Many of the bystanders said that this was well done and deserved friendship. The king said that Thorolf had himself taken his own reward. Thorolf said that he had loyally done all he could to please the king. 'But if he likes it not,' said he, 'I cannot help it: the king knows, when I was with him and in his train, how I bore myself; it is wonderful to me if the king thinks me other now than he proved me to be then.'
The king answered: 'Thou didst bear thyself well, Thorolf, when thou wert with us; and this, I think, is best to do still, that thou join my guard, bear my banner, be captain over the guard; then will no man slander thee, if I can oversee night and day what thy conduct is.'
Thorolf looked on either hand where stood his house-carles; then said he: 'Loth were I to deliver up these my followers: about thy titles and grants to me, O king, thou wilt have thine own way, but my following I will not deliver up while my means last, though I manage at my own sole cost. My request and wish, O king, is this, that thou come and visit me at my home, and the hear word of men whom thou trustest, what witness they bear to me in this matter; thereafter do as thou findest proof to warrant.' ​The king answered and said that he would not again accept entertainment from Thorolf; so Thorolf went out, and made ready to return home.
But when he was gone, the king put into the hands of Hildirida's sons his business in Halogaland which Thorolf had before had, as also the Finmark journey. The king claimed ownership of the estate at Torgar, and of all the property that Brynjolf had had; and all this he gave into the keeping of Hildirida's sons. The king sent messengers with tokens to Thorolf to tell him of this arrangement, whereupon Thorolf took the ships belonging to him, put on board all the chattels he could carry, and with all his men, both freedmen and thralls, sailed northwards to his farm at Sandness, where he kept up no fewer and no less state than before.
Chapter XVII.
Hildirida's sons in Finmark and at Harold's court.
 Hildirida's sons took the business in Halogaland; and none gainsaid this because of the king's power, but Thorolf's kinsmen and friends were much displeased at the change. The two brothers went on the fell in the winter, taking with them thirty men. To the Finns there seemed much less honour in these stewards than when Thorolf came, and the money due was far worse paid.
That same winter Thorolf went up on the fell with a hundred men; he passed on at once eastwards to Kvenland and met king Faravid. They took counsel together, and resolved to go on the fell again as in the winter before; and with four hundred men they made a descent on Kirialaland, and attacked those districts for which they thought themselves a match in numbers, and harrying there took much booty, returning up to Finmark as the winter wore on. In the spring Thorolf went home to his farm, and then employed his men at the fishing in Vagar, and some in herring-fishing, and had the take of every kind brought to his farm.
 ​Thorolf had a large ship, which was waiting to put to sea. It was elaborate in everything, beautifully painted down to the sea-line, the sails also carefully striped with blue and red, and all the tackling as elaborate as the ship. Thorolf had this ship made ready, and put aboard some of his house-carles as crew; he freighted it with dried fish and hides, and ermine and gray furs too in abundance, and other peltry such as he had gotten from the fell; it was a most valuable cargo. This ship he bade sail westwards for England to buy him clothes and other supplies that he needed; and they, first steering southwards along the coast, then stretching across the main, came to England. There they found a good market, laded the ship with wheat and honey and wine and clothes, and sailing back in autumn with a fair wind came to Hordaland. 
That same autumn Hildirida's sons carried tribute to the king. But when they paid it the king himself was present and saw. He said:
'Is this tribute now paid all that ye took in Finmark?'
'It is,' they answered.
'Less by far,' said the king, 'and much worse paid is the tribute now than when Thorolf gathered it; yet ye said that he managed the business ill.'
'It is well, O king,' said Harek, 'that thou hast considered how large a tribute should usually come from Finmark, because thus thou knowest how much thou losest, if Thorolf waste all the tribute before thee. Last winter we were in Finmark with thirty men, as has been the wont of thy stewards heretofore. Soon after came Thorolf with a hundred men, and we learnt this, that he meant to take the lives of us two brothers and all our followers, his reason being that thou, O king, hadst handed over to us the business that he wished to have. It was then our best choice to shun meeting him, and to save ourselves: therefore we quickly left the settled districts, and went on the fell. But Thorolf went all round Finmark with his armed warriors; he had all the trade, the Finns paid him tribute, and he hindered thy stewards from entering Finmark. He means to be made king over the north there, both over Finmark and Halogaland: and the wonder is that thou wilt listen to ​him in anything whatever. Herein may true evidence be found of Thorolf's ill-gotten gains from Finmark; for the largest merchant ship in Halogaland was made ready for sea at Sandness in the spring, and all the cargo on board was said to be Thorolf's. It was laden mostly, I think, with gray furs, but there would be found there also bearskins and sables more than Thorolf brought to thee. And with that ship went Thorgils Yeller, and I believe he sailed westwards for England. But if thou wilt know the truth of this, set spies on the track of Thorgils when he comes eastwards; for I fancy that no trading-ship in our days has carried such store of wealth. And I am telling thee what is true, O king, when I say that to thee belongs every penny on board.'
All that Harek said his companions confirmed, and none there ventured to gainsay.
Chapter 18 - Thorolf's ship is taken.
There were two brothers named Sigtrygg Swiftfarer and Hallvard Hardfarer, kinsmen of king Harold on the mother's side; from their father, a wealthy man, they had inherited an estate in Hising. Four brothers there were in all; but Thord and Thorgeir, the two younger, were at home, and managed the estate. Sigtrygg and Hallvard carried all the king's messages, both within and without the land, and had gone on many dangerous journeys, both for putting men out of the way and confiscating the goods of those whose homes the king ordered to be attacked. They kept about them a large following; they were not generally in favour, but the king prized them highly. None could match them at travelling, either on foot or on snow-shoes; in voyaging also they were speedier than others, valiant men they were, and very wary.
These two men were with the king when those things happened that have just been told. In the autumn the king ​went to a banquet in Hordaland. And one day he summoned to him the brothers Hallvard and Sigtrygg, and when they came he bade them go with their following and spy after the ship which Thorgils had taken westward to England in the summer.
'Bring me,' said he, 'the ship and all that is in it, except the men; let them go their way in peace, if they do not try to defend the ship.'
The brothers made them ready for this, and, taking each one his long-ship, went to seek Thorgils, and learnt that he was come from the west, and had sailed northwards along the coast. Northwards after him went they, and found him in Fir Sound. They knew the ship at once, and laid one of their ships on the seaward side of her, while some of them landed, and thence went out on to the ship by the gangways. Thorgils' crew, apprehending no danger, made no defence; they found out nothing till many armed men were aboard, and so they were all seized, and afterwards put on shore weaponless, with nothing but the clothes they wore. But Hallvard's men drew out the gangways, loosed the cables, and towed out the ship; then turned them about, and sailed southwards along the coast till they met the king, to whom they brought the ship and all that was in it. And when the cargo was unloaded, the king saw that it was great wealth, and what Harek had said was no lie.
But Thorgils and his comrades got conveyance, and went to Kveldulf and his son, and told of the misadventure of their voyage, yet were they well received. Kveldulf said all was tending to what he had foreboded, that Thorolf would not in the end have good luck in his friendship with king Harold.
'And I care little,' said he, 'for Thorolf's money loss in this, if worse does not come after; but I misdoubt, as before, that Thorolf will not rightly rate his own means against the stronger power with which he has to deal.'
And he bade Thorgils say this to Thorolf:
'My counsel is that you go away out of the land, for maybe you will do better for yourself if you serve under the king of England, or of Denmark, or of Sweden.'
Then he gave Thorgils a rowing-cutter with tackling complete, a tent also, and provisions, and all things needful ​for their journey. So they departed, and stayed not their journey till they came to Thorolf and told him all that had happened.
Thorolf took his loss cheerfully, and said that he should not be short of money; tis good,' said he, 'to be in partnership with a king.' He then bought meal and all that he needed for the maintenance of his people; his house-carles must for awhile, he said, be less bravely attired than he had purposed. Some lands he sold, some he mortgaged, but he kept up all expenses as before; he had no fewer men with him than last winter, nay, rather more. And as to feasts and friends entertained at his house, he had more means for all this than before. He stayed at home all that winter.
Chapter 19 - Thorolf retaliates.
When spring came, and the snow and ice were loosed, then Thorolf launched a large warship of his own, and he had it made ready, and equipped his house-carles, taking with him more than a hundred men; and a goodly company there were, and well weaponed. And when a fair wind blew, Thorolf steered southwards along the coast till he came to Byrda; then they held an outer course outside the islands, but at times through channels between hill-slopes. Thus they coasted on southwards, and had no tidings of men till they came eastwards to Vik. There they heard that king Harold was in Vik, meaning in the summer to go into Upland. The people of the country knew nothing of Thorolf's voyage. With a fair wind he held on south to Denmark, and thence into the Baltic, where he harried through that summer, but got no good booty. In the autumn he steered back from the east to Denmark, at the time when the fleet at Eyrar was breaking up. In the summer there had been, as was usual, many shipsPublic Law 98-483 - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Public Law 98-483
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Public Law 98-483by the 98th Congress of the United States
◄  Public Law 98-482  Pub.L. 98−483, 98 Stat. 2258, H.R. 2889, enacted October 17, 1984.  Public Law 98-484  ►
Note: This is the original legislation as it was initially enacted. Any subsequent amendments hosted on Wikisource may be listed using  What Links Here.
98TH UNITED STATES CONGRESS2ND SESSION
An ActTo amend the National Historic Preservation Act, and for other purposes.
​
Public Law 98-483
98th Congress
Oct. 17, 1984[H.R. 2889]
AN ACTTo amend the National Historic Preservation Act, and for other purposes.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled, Appropriation authorization.That section 212(a) of the National Historic Preservation Act (16 U.S.C. 470t(a)) is amended by striking out the second and third sentences and inserting in lieu thereof “To carry out the provisions of this title, there is authorized to be appropriated not more than $2,500,000 for each of the fiscal years 1985 through 1989”.
Approved October 17, 1984.
LEGISLATIVE HISTORY—H.R. 2889:
HOUSE REPORT No. 98-761 (Comm. on Interior and Insular Affairs).
SENATE REPORT No. 98-623 (Comm. on Energy and Natural Resources).
CONGRESSIONAL RECORD, Vol. 130 (1984):
June 4, considered and passed House.
Oct. 3, considered and passed Senate, amended.
Oct 4, House concurred in Senate amendment.
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1365
Cached time: 20221012024421
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: []
CPU time usage: 0.076 seconds
Real time usage: 0.137 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 953/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 14993/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1459/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 0/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 3458/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.011/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1232412/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  121.309      1 -total
 45.66%   55.387      1 Template:Act_of_Congress
 42.84%   51.973      1 Page:United_States_Statutes_at_Large_Volume_98_Part_2.djvu/1098
 17.05%   20.681      1 Template:USStatute
 12.06%   14.635      3 Template:Str_number/trim
 10.53%   12.774      1 Template:Plain_sister
  8.99%   10.901      1 Template:USBill
  8.60%   10.433      8 Template:Replace
  8.44%   10.242      1 Template:USStatChapHead
  5.36%    6.507      1 Template:Ci
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:3759443-0!canonical and timestamp 20221012024421 and revision id 11753442.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Public_Law_98-483&oldid=11753442"
Categories: 1984 worksUnited States federal law
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageSourceDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this page
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 7 October 2021, at 02:24.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Black v. Cutter Laboratories - Wikisource, the free online library
Black v. Cutter Laboratories - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Black v. Cutter Laboratories
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Black v. Cutter Laboratories by Tom C. ClarkSyllabusrelated portals: Supreme Court of the United States.sister projects: Wikidata item.
912367Black v. Cutter Laboratories — SyllabusTom C. Clark
Court Documents
Opinion of the Court
Dissenting Opinion
Douglas
United States Supreme Court351 U.S. 292Black  v.  Cutter Laboratories Argued: April 26, 1956. --- Decided: June 4, 1956
Mr.Joseph Forer, Washington, D.C., for petitioners.
Messrs. Gardiner Johnson, Thomas E. Stanton, Jr., San Francisco, Cal., for respondent.
Mr. Justice CLARK delivered the opinion of the Court. 
Notes[edit]
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work of the United States federal government (see 17 U.S.C. 105).
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1327
Cached time: 20221017211901
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.081 seconds
Real time usage: 0.114 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 501/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 14487/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3398/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 7/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 0/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.034/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1467491/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%   90.050      1 -total
 73.88%   66.527      1 Template:Header
 13.92%   12.536      1 Template:PD-USGov
 12.20%   10.988      1 Template:License
  6.86%    6.174      1 Template:Header/main_block
  5.93%    5.342      1 Template:CaseCaption
  4.85%    4.368      1 Template:License_scope
  3.35%    3.016      1 Template:USSCcase
  2.76%    2.487      2 Template:Uc
  2.44%    2.201      1 Template:License_grammar
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:912367-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211901 and revision id 3002157.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Black_v._Cutter_Laboratories&oldid=3002157"
Categories: United States Supreme Court decisionsUnited States Supreme Court decisions in Volume 351PD-USGovHidden categories: Case missing lower courtCase missing case numberUncategorized United States Supreme Court decision
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 26 June 2011, at 05:24.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Weekly List, National Register of Historic Places (November 9, 1984) - Wikisource, the free online library
Weekly List, National Register of Historic Places (November 9, 1984) - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Weekly List, National Register of Historic Places (November 9, 1984)
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
←November 2
Weekly List, National Register of Historic Places (November 9, 1984)  by the United States National Park ServiceNovember 16→
related portals: United States National Park Service.sister projects: Wikidata item.
2663824Weekly List, National Register of Historic Places (November 9, 1984)1984by the United States National Park Service
​
IN REPLY REFER TO:
United States Department of the Interior
NATIONAL PARK SERVICEWASHINGTON, D.C.  20240
The Director of the National Park Service is pleased to inform you that the following properties have been entered in the National Register of Historic Places beginning October 28, 1984 and ending November 3, 1984. For further information call (202) 343-9552.
ARKANSAS, Benton County, Bentonville, Rice, James A., House, 204 SE Third St. (11/01/84)
ARKANSAS, Carroll County, Carrollton, Yell Masonic Lodge Hall, Off AR 68 (11/01/84)
ARKANSAS, Monroe County, Clarendon, Anderson Boarding House (Clarendon MRA), 201 Main St. (11/01/84)
ARKANSAS, Monroe County, Clarendon, Bank of Clarendon (Clarendon MRA), 125 Court St. (11/01/84)
ARKANSAS, Monroe County, Clarendon, Bateman-Griffith House (Clarendon MRA), 316 Jefferson St. (11/01/84)
ARKANSAS, Monroe County, Clarendon, Bondi Brothers Store (Clarendon MRA), 104 Madison St. (11/01/84)
ARKANSAS, Monroe County, Clarendon, Bounds Building (Clarendon MRA), 105 Second St. (11/01/84)
ARKANSAS, Monroe County, Clarendon, Clarendon Methodist-Episcopal Church South (Clarendon MRA), 121 Third St. (11/01/84)
ARKANSAS, Monroe County, Clarendon, Ewan Building (Clarendon MRA), 124—128 Second St. (11/01/84)
ARKANSAS, Monroe County, Clarendon, Goldman and Son Store (Clarendon MRA), 101 Main St. (11/01/84)
ARKANSAS, Monroe County, Clarendon, Highway 79 Bridge (Clarendon MRA), U.S. 79 and White River (11/01/84)
ARKANSAS, Monroe County, Clarendon, Jefferies Building (Clarendon MRA), 122 Madison St. (11/01/84)
ARKANSAS, Monroe County, Clarendon, Jefferies-Craptree House (Clarendon MRA), 300 Jefferson St. (11/01/84)
ARKANSAS, Monroe County, Clarendon, Manning, Lee and Moore Law Office (Clarendon MRA), 109 Court St. (11/01/84)
ARKANSAS, Monroe County, Clarendon, Marston House (Clarendon MRA), 429 Main St. (11/01/84)
ARKANSAS, Monroe County, Clarendon, Midland Depot (Clarendon MRA), 205 Midland St. (11/01/84)
ARKANSAS, Monroe County, Clarendon, New South Inn (Clarendon MRA), 132—164 Second St. (11/01/84)
FLORIDA, Hillsborough County, Tampa, Hayden Estate Building, 1016—1016½ N. Franklin St. (11/01/84)
FLORIDA, Jefferson County, Lloyd, Lloyd-Bond House, Rond St. (11/01/84)
FLORIDA, Monroe County, Key Largo vicinity, Carysfort Lighthouse, Key Largo National Marine Sanctuary (10/31/84)
FLORIDA, Pinellas County, St. Petersburg, Alexander Hotel, 535 Central Ave. (11/01/84)
HAWAII, Honolulu County, Honolulu, Dickey, C.W., House, 3030 Kalakaua Ave. (11/01/84)
HAWAII, Honolulu County, Honolulu, Henriques, Edgar and Lucy, House, 20 Old Pali Pl. (11/01/84)
HAWAII, Kauai County, Waimea, Gay, Charles, House, Gay Rd. (11/01/84)
 ​ILLINOIS, DuPage County, Glen Ellyn, Glen Ellyn Main Street Historic District, Main St. between Cottage Ave. and Maple St. (10/29/84)
IOWA, Scott County, Davenport, Columbia Avenue Historic District (Davenport MRA), Roughly W. Columbia Ave., Harrison, Ripley, and W. Haynes Sts. (11/01/84)
IOWA, Scott County, Davenport, Dessaint, Marie Clare, House (Davenport MRA), 4808 Northwest Blvd. (11/01/84)
IOWA, Scott County, Davenport, Hoersch, John, House (Davenport MRA), 716 Vine St. (11/01/84)
IOWA, Scott County, Davenport, House at 2212 W. River Drive (Davenport MRA), 2212 W. River Dr. (11/01/84)
IOWA, Scott County, Davenport, Littig, John, House (Davenport MRA), 6035 Northwest Blvd. (11/01/84)
IOWA, Scott County, Davenport, McClellan Heights Historic District (Davenport MRA), Roughly bounded by city limits, E. River Dr., East St., Jersey Ridge and Middle Rds. (11/01/84)
IOWA, Scott County, Davenport, Oak Lane Historic District (Davenport MRA), Oak Lane between High and Locust Sts. (11/01/84)
IOWA, Scott County, Davenport, Prospect Park Historic District (Davenport MRA), Roughly bounded by E. River Dr., Mississippi Ave., Prospect Terr., 11th and Adams Sts. (11/01/84)
IOWA, Scott County, Davenport, Riverview Terrace Historic District (Davenport MRA), Roughly Riverview Terr., Clay an Marquette Sts. (11/01/84)
IOWA, Scott County, Davenport, Woods, Oscar C., House (Davenport MRA), 1825 Grand Ave. (11/01/84)
KENTUCKY, Butler County, Morgantown, Butler County Jail, S. Warren and E. Logan Sts. (11/01/84)
KENTUCKY, Jefferson County, Louisville, Shawnee Elementary School (West Louisville MRA), 4151 Herman St. (11/02/84)
KENTUCKY, Jefferson County, Louisville, Shawnee High School (West Louisville MRA), 4015 Herman St. (11/02/84)
MISSOURI, St. Louis County, Oakville vicinity, Koch, Robert, Hospital, 4101 Koch Rd. (10/31/84)
NEW YORK, Westchester County, Irvington, Irvington Town Hall, 85 Main St. (11/01/84)
NORTHERN MARIANA ISLANDS, Saipan Island, Garapan, Campaneyan Kristo Rai, Beach Rd. (10/30/84)
OHIO, Butler County, Trenton vicinity, Augspurger, John, Farm No. 2 (Augspurger Amish/Mennonite Settlement TR), 3046 Pierson Rd. (11/01/84)
OHIO, Butler County, Trenton vicinity, Augspurger, Samuel, Farm (Augspurger Amish/Mennonite Settlement TR), 2070 Woodsdale Rd. (11/01/84)
OHIO, Butler County, Trenton vicinity, Schrock, Peter Jr., Farm (Augspurger Amish/Mennonite Settlement TR), Edgewood Dr. (11/01/84)
OHIO, Butler County, Woodsdale, Augspurger Grist Mill (Augspurger Amish/Mennonite Settlement TR), Wayne-Madison Rd. (11/01/84)
OHIO, Butler County, Woodsdale, Augspurger Schoolhouse (Augspurger Amish/Mennonite Settlement TR), Wayne-Madison Rd. (11/01/84)
OHIO, Butler County, Woodsdale, Augspurger, Samuel, House (Augspurger Amish/Mennonite Settlement TR), Wayne-Madison and Kennedy Rds. (11/01/84)
OHIO, Butler County, Woodsdale, Mill Office and Post Office (Augspurger Amish/Mennonite Settlement TR), Woodsdale Rd. (11/01/84)
OHIO, Butler County, Woodsdale, Mill Worker Row House (Augspurger Amish/Mennonite Settlement TR), Kennedy Rd. (11/01/84)
OHIO, Butler County, Woodsdale, Mill Worker Row Houses (Augspurger Amish/Mennonite Set
=========
Social Security Act 2018 (Version 56) - Wikisource, the free online library
Social Security Act 2018 (Version 56) - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Social Security Act 2018 (Version 56)
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
    Social Security Act 2018, Version 56 Section 1 - Title→
related portals: New Zealand.sister projects: Wikidata item.
3315042Social Security Act 2018, Version 56
Social Security Act 2018
Public Act
2018 No 32
Date of assent
28 September 2018
Commencement
see section 2
​
Contents
1
Title
2
Commencement
Part 1General provisions
3
Purpose of this Act
4
Principles
5
Guide to this Act
6
Definitions are in dictionary in Schedule 2
7
Minister may give MSD binding directions
8
Determinations person is single or in de facto relationship
9
Interpretation: references to old law, and using it as a guide
10
Comparative tables of old and new provisions
11
Transitional, savings, and related provisions
12
Act binds the Crown
13
Status of guides or outlines
14
Status of examples
Part 2Assistance
Subpart 1—Introduction
15
What this Part does
16
Residential requirement
17
Rates
18
General limitation on receiving more than 1 benefit
​
19
General limitation on receiving benefit: persons unlawfully resident or present in New Zealand and persons holding temporary entry class visa
Subpart 2—Jobseeker support
20
Jobseeker support: requirements
21
What is work gap
22
When person is available for work
23
Jobseeker support: age requirement
24
Jobseeker support: no or minimum income
25
Jobseeker support: discretionary grant on ground of hardship
26
Jobseeker support: ineligibility
27
Jobseeker support: on ground of health condition, injury, or disability: application must include certificate
28
Jobseeker support: on ground of health condition, injury, or disability: medical examination
Subpart 3—Sole parent support
29
Sole parent support: requirements
30
What is sole parent requirement
31
When dependent child may be regarded as applicant’s child
32
Sole parent support: situation of split care
33
Expiry of sole parent support, and replacement with jobseeker support, when youngest dependent child turns 14 years old
Subpart 4—Supported living payment
Supported living payment on ground of restricted work capacity or total blindness
34
Supported living payment: on ground of restricted work capacity or total blindness: requirements
35
When person has restricted work capacity
36
Supported living payment: on ground of restricted work capacity or total blindness: ineligibility
37
Supported living payment: on ground of restricted work capacity or total blindness: medical examination
38
Supported living payment: on ground of restricted work capacity or total blindness: payment not apportioned in specified cases
39
Supported living payment: on ground of restricted work capacity: encouraging open employment
Supported living payment on ground of caring for another person
40
Supported living payment: on ground of caring for another person: requirements
41
Supported living payment: on ground of caring for another person: application must include certificate
​
42
Supported living payment: on ground of caring for another person: medical examination
Subpart 5—Orphan’s benefit
43
Orphan’s benefit: requirements
44
Who is eligible caregiver
45
Orphan’s benefit to be used for benefit of child
Subpart 6—Unsupported child’s benefit
46
Unsupported child’s benefit: requirements
47
Who is eligible caregiver
48
Unsupported child’s benefit to be used for benefit of child
Subpart 7—Youth payment
49
Youth payment: requirements
50
When person is study ready
51
Youth payment: no or minimum income
52
When person has parental support gap
53
Youth payment: discretionary grant on ground of hardship
54
Youth payment: continuation after turning 18 years old
55
Youth payment: incentive payments
Subpart 8—Young parent payment
56
Young parent payment: requirements
57
When person is study ready
58
Young parent payment: no or minimum income
59
When person has parental support gap
60
Young parent payment: discretionary grant on ground of hardship
61
Young parent payment: continuation after turning 20 years old
62
Young parent payment: incentive payments
Subpart 9—Emergency benefit
63
Emergency benefit: discretionary grant on ground of hardship
64
Emergency benefit: grant during epidemic in New Zealand
Subpart 10—Accommodation supplement
65
Accommodation supplement: discretionary grant
66
Social housing exclusion
67
Other funding exclusion
68
Accommodation supplement: special rules for joint tenants who are in relationship
69
Accommodation supplement: refusal, reduction, or cancellation of grant in certain circumstances
Subpart 11—Winter energy payment
70
Winter energy payment: purpose
71
Winter energy payment: interpretation
​
72
Winter energy payment: requirements
73
Winter energy payment: election not to receive
74
Winter energy payment: instalments, rates, and payment
75
Winter energy payment: termination on review
Subpart 12—Childcare assistance
76
Childcare assistance: purpose
77
Childcare assistance: eligibility
Subpart 13—Child disability allowance
78
Child disability allowance: discretionary grant
79
Meaning of child with a serious disability
80
Child disability allowance: MSD may require medical certificate
81
Child disability allowance: MSD may require medical examination
82
Child disability allowance: payment
83
Child disability allowance: not payable with other assistance or pension
Subpart 14—Disability allowance
84
Meaning of disability
85
Disability allowance: discretionary grant
86
Disability allowance: excluded expenses
87
Disability allowance: refusal, reduction, or cancellation of grant in certain circumstances
88
Disability allowance: medical examination
89
Special disability allowance: entitlement in special circumstances
Subpart 15—Funeral grants
90
Funeral grant: general eligibility and definitions
91
Funeral grant: eligibility if deceased person has dependants
92
Funeral grant: eligibility if deceased person has no dependants
93
Funeral grant: eligibility if deceased person is child
94
Funeral grant: restrictions on payment
Subpart 16—Hardship assistance
95
Temporary additional support: purpose
96
Temporary additional support: requirements
97
Temporary additional support: refusal, reduction, or cancellation of grant in certain circumstances
98
Interpretation
Subpart 17—Special assistance
99
Overseas epidemics affecting visitors to New Zealand: Minister may give overseas epidemic management notice
100
Special assistance for visitors affected by overseas epidemics
101
Approved special assistance programmes
102
Special assistance: status of, and access to, notices
​
Subpart 18—Extended payment of benefits for children aged 18 years or over who continue education
103
Provisions relating to children aged 18 years or over who continue education
Part 3Obligations
Subpart 1—Introduction
Guide to this Part
104
What this Part does
105
Failure to comply with obligation under this Part
Subpart 2—MSD’s obligations
Steps to make people affected aware of their obligations, etc
106
MSD must make people affected aware of their obligations, consequences of non-compliance, and their review and appeal rights
Steps to explain overseas absence rules
107
MSD must explain rules relating to absence from New Zealand
Steps to assist compliance with overseas pensions obligations
108
MSD must assist in relation to obtaining overseas pension, etc
Subpart 3—Beneficiaries’ obligations
Beneficiaries: general and specific obligations
109
Outline of beneficiary’s general and specific obligations
110
When obligations apply
General obligations: holding, and giving details of, bank account
111
Beneficiary must hold, and give MSD details of, bank account
General obligations: supplying tax file number
112
Beneficiary must supply tax file number
General obligations: notification of change of circumstances
113
Beneficiary must notify change of circumstances
Specific obligations: notification of absence from New Zealand
114
Obligation to notify absence from New Zealand
Specific obligations: work ability assessment
115
Obligation to undergo work ability assessment
116
Persons subject to work ability assessment
117
Persons not subject to work ability assessment
118
Work ability assessment
​
119
Person who fails to comply with requirement to undergo work ability assessment is subject to sanction
Specific obligations: work preparation
120
Work-preparation obligations
121
Persons subject to work-preparation obligations
122
Persons not subject to work-preparation obligations
123
Persons subject to work-preparation obligations if sufficient capacity to comply
124
General obligation to take all steps to prepare for employment
125
Work-preparation obligations as required by MSD
126
Person who fails to comply with work-preparation obligation subject to sanction
127
Obligations in relation to dependent children
128
Obligations of beneficiary in relation to dependent children
129
Obligations of spouse or partner of beneficiary in relation to dependent children of beneficiary
130
Obligations of spouse or partner of beneficiary in relation to dependent children of spouse or partner
131
Attendance of dependent child aged 3 to 5 years at early childhood education programme
132
Attendance of dependent child aged 5 or 6 years at early childhood education programme or registered school
133
Attendance of dependent child aged 6 to 15 years at registered school
134
Health care enrolment and compliance with core health checks
135
Interviews and reporting
136
Person who fails to comply with obligations in relation to dependent children is subject to sanction
137
Definitions and attendance: regulations made under section 430
Specific obligations: work-test obligations
138
Work-test obligations
139
Purpose of sections 140 to 154
140
Persons subject to work-test obligations
141
Jobseeker support: work capacity determination and work test
142
Person not subject to work-test obligations
143
Time when work-test obligation applies
144
General obligation to be available for suitable employment, etc
145
Meaning of suitable employment
146
Work-test obligations as required by MSD
147
Obligation to undertake and pass drug test
148
Compliant drug test defined
​
149
Failing drug test
150
Use of drug test result
151
Costs of drug test
152
Definitions for drug-testing provisions
153
Person who fails to comply with work-test obligations is subject to sanction
154
Deemed failure to comply with work-test obligation
Deferral of work-test obligations
155
Deferral of work-test obligations
156
Effect of deferral of work-test obligations
Exemptions: work-preparation, work-test, and other obligations
157
Regulations may specify categories of exempt persons and grounds for exemption
158
MSD may grant exemption from work-preparation, work-test, or other obligation
159
Donors of qualifying organs exempt from work-preparation, worktest, or other obligation while recuperating
160
Procedure for grant of exemption
161
Person who fails to comply with requirement to attend interview is subject to sanction
Specific obligations: young person granted youth support payment
162
Obligations of young person granted youth support payment
163
When education obligation or training obligation begins for young parent
Specific obligations: social obligations of young person granted young parent payment
164
Obligations of young person granted young parent payment
Specific obligations: young person aged 18 or 19 years who is receiving jobseeker support and who is at significant risk of longterm welfare dependency
165
Young person aged 18 or 19 years who is receiving jobseeker support in young person’s own right and who is at significant risk of long-term welfare dependency
Obligations of, and incentives for, young person who is spouse or partner of beneficiary
166
Young person aged 16 or 17 years who has no dependent child and who is spouse or partner of specified beneficiary
167
Young person aged 16 to 19 years who has dependent child and who is spouse or partner of specified beneficiary
​
168
Young person aged 18 or 19 years, who is receiving jobseeker support as spouse or partner of person granted that benefit, or who is work-tested spouse or partner of specified beneficiary, and who is at significant risk of long-term welfare dependency
169
Interpretation
Specific obligations: obligation to work with contracted service providers
170
Obligation to work with contracted service providers
171
Person who fails to comply with requirement under section 170(2) subject to sanction
General obligations: obligations in relation to overseas pensions
172
Interpretation
173
Applicant for benefit, etc, to take reasonable steps to obtain overseas pension
174
MSD may give notice requiring person to take reasonable steps to obtain overseas pension
175
MSD may give notice requiring person to take reasonable steps to obtain overseas pension for dependant
176
Failure to comply with MSD’s notice given under section 174 or 175
177
Applicant for benefit must provide information as to rate of overseas pension
178
MSD may give notice requiring beneficiary to provide information as to rate of overseas pension
179
Failure to comply with MSD’s notice given under section 178
180
Meaning of rate
Miscellaneous
181
Application of health and safety legislation, etc
182
Obligations suspended where MSD has exercised discretion to pay benefit while beneficiary overseas
Part 4Factors affecting benefits
Subpart 1—Guide to this Part
183
What this Part does
Subpart 2—Factors affecting benefits
Factors affecting benefits: pre-benefit activities
184
Regulations may prescribe pre-benefit activities
185
MSD must explain requirements
Factors affecting benefits: insurance recovery
186
Benefit may be subject to repayment of insurance payment
​
Factors reducing benefits: entitlement to overseas pensions
187
Interpretation
188
Persons affected by receipt of overseas pension
189
Benefit of person affected is reduced by amount of overseas pension
190
MSD may enter into arrangement with person affected by receipt of overseas pension
191
Treatment of certain overseas benefits, pensions, and allowances that are not overseas pensions
Factors reducing benefits: failure to assist child support
192
MSD must reduce rates of benefits for sole parents for failure to assist child support
193
No reduction in certain cases
194
Additional reduction in certain cases
Factors affecting eligibility for benefit: shared care of dependent child
195
Shared care of dependent child
196
Rules for assessing which parent has greater responsibility for dependent child
Factors reducing benefits: compensation or damages
197
Effect of compensation or damages on application for benefit
198
Loss of earnings compensation under Accident Compensation Act 2001
Factors affecting benefit: veteran’s entitlement
199
Veteran’s entitlement excludes any other benefit
200
Exceptions to rule that veteran’s entitlement excludes any other benefit
Factors affecting benefit: personal benefit excludes benefit on behalf
201
Personal benefit of spouse or partner excludes benefit on behalf of spouse or partner
Factors affecting benefit: maintenance claim
202
MSD may refuse or cancel benefit for failure to take reasonable steps to obtain maintenance
Factors affecting benefit: family protection claim
203
MSD may refuse or cancel benefit if family protection claim not pursued
​
Factors affecting benefit: person not ordinarily resident in New Zealand
204
MSD may refuse or cancel benefit if person not ordinarily resident in New Zealand
Factors affecting benefit: refugee or protected person status
205
Refugee or protected person status
Factors affecting benefit: hospitalisation
206
Hospitalisation
207
Benefit of spouse or partner increased after 13th week of hospitalisation
Factors affecting benefit: alcohol and drug treatment
208
Beneficiary resident in institution for treatment of alcoholism or drug addiction
Factors affecting benefit: issue of warrant for beneficiary’s arrest
209
Benefit not payable to person who is subject to warrant of arrest
210
Beneficiary and offence defined for section 209
211
MSD must give beneficiary notice of unresolved warrant
212
Requirements for unresolved warrant notice
213
Immediate suspension of benefit at request of New Zealand Police
214
Beneficiary and offence defined for section 213
215
MSD must give beneficiary notice of immediate suspension
216
Effect of non-payment or suspension of benefit
Factors affecting benefit: custody in prison or on remand
217
Benefit not payable during custody in prison or on remand
218
Exceptions to rule that benefit not payable during custody in prison or on remand
Factors affecting benefit: absence from New Zealand
219
General rule: benefit not payable while beneficiary absent from New Zealand
220
Special absence rule: winter energy payment
Factors affecting benefit: additional dependent child
221
Purpose of sections 222 to 224
222
Additional dependent child must not be taken into account in certain cases
223
Extended application of additional dependent child rules
224
Limited application of additional dependent child rules
Factors affecting benefit: voluntary unemployment or loss of employment through misconduct, etc
225
Basic rule: no work-tested benefit for 13 weeks after leaving employment or scheme or loss of employment due to misconduct
​
226
Persons to whom basic rule applies
227
What happens if basic rule applies
228
MSD’s options in case of misconduct
229
Interpretation
Factors affecting benefits: non-entitlement period, stand down, or 100% suspension of benefit
230
How non-entitlement period, etc, affects supplementary benefits, and spouse or partner
Part 5Enforcement: sanctions and offences
Subpart 1—Guide to this Part
231
What this Part does
Subpart 2—Sanctions for breach of obligations other than young person or young parent obligations
Types of sanction
232
Sanctions for failure to comply with certain obligations under this Act
233
Obligations that carry sanction for failure to comply
Hierarchy of sanctions
234
Hierarchy of sanctions
235
Failure, and first, second, and third failure, defined for obligations other than young person or young parent obligations
236
Sanction for first failure: reduction in main benefit
237
Sanction for second failure: suspension of main benefit
238
Sanction for third failure: cancellation of main benefit
239
Reduction or suspension of reduced benefit
How number of failures is counted
240
Failures that can be counted
241
Meaning of continuous payment
242
Failures that cannot be counted
Special cases: variations on ordinary sanctions rules
243
Exclusion of sanction if failure is subject of prosecution under Education Act 1989
244
Variation for failure to comply with work-test obligation to accept offer of suitable employment
245
Variation for breach of work-test obligation by 1 spouse or partner
246
Variation for breach of work-test obligation by both partners or spouses
​
247
Variation for suspension or cancellation of benefit or non-entitlement period affecting couple with 1 or more dependent children
248
Variation for suspension or cancellation of main benefit or non-entitlement period affecting sole parent
Good and sufficient reason for non-compliance
249
Good and sufficient reason for non-compliance: default by MSD
250
Good and sufficient reason for failure to comply with drug-testing obligation
251
Good and sufficient reason for failure to supervise dependent child
Procedure for imposing sanction
252
MSD must give notice of sanction
253
Notice relates to single failure
254
How notice of sanction may be given
255
Breach of obligation in relation to dependent children: additional steps before notice may be given
256
When reduction, suspension, or cancellation of benefit takes effect
Evidential drug test
257
Request for evidential drug test if sanction imposed for failing screening drug test
258
Effect of request for evidential drug test
259
Effect of failure of evidential drug test
260
Costs of evidential drug test
Recompliance
261
How person recomplies after failure to comply with obligation
262
Impossibility of remedying failure of work-test obligation
263
How person recomplies after failure to comply with drug-testing obligation
264
Drug testing for purposes of recompliance
265
Failure of drug test for purposes of recompliance constitutes third failure
266
Costs of drug testing for purposes of recompliance
Miscellaneous
267
Case management support for beneficiary in breach of obligation in relation to dependent children
Subpart 3—Sanctions for breach of young person or young parent obligations
Interpretation
268
Failure, and first, second, and third failure, defined for young person or young parent obligations
​
Sanctions: young person obligations
269
Sanction for failure to comply with young person obligation
270
Sanction for first or second failure: suspension of in-hand allowance and incentive payments
271
Sanction for third failure: cancellation of youth payment and incentive payments
272
Effect of cancellation of youth payment on accommodation supplement or temporary additional support
273
Effect of cancellation of youth payment on emergency benefit
274
Effect of cancellation of youth payment on disability allowance or child disability allowance
275
Sanctions for failure by young person required to receive youth services to comply with obligations: money management
276
Sanctions for failure by young person required to receive youth services to comply with obligations: other cases
277
Sanctions for failure by young spouse or partner of specified beneficiary to comply with obligations: money management
278
Sanctions for failure by young spouse or partner of specified beneficiary to comply with obligations: other cases
Sanctions: young parent obligations
279
Sanction for failure to comply with young parent obligation
280
Sanction for first or second failure: suspension of in-hand allowance and incentive payments
281
Sanction for third failure: cancellation of young parent payment and incentive payments
282
Effect of cancellation of young parent payment
283
Effect of cancellation of young parent payment on accommodation supplement or temporary additional support
284
Effect of cancellation of young parent payment on emergency benefit
285
Effect of cancellation of young parent payment on disability allowance or child disability allowance
How obligation satisfied
286
How young person satisfies obligation after failure to comply
Procedure
287
Procedure for imposing sanctions for failure to comply with young person or young parent obligation
Incentive payments
288
Effect of regrant of youth payment on incentive payment
289
MSD may cancel incentive payment
​
Subpart 4—Offences
290
Offences: false statements, misleading, or attempting to mislead, to receive or continue to receive benefits
291
Offences: spouse or partner knowingly benefiting from excess amount obtained by beneficiary’s fraud
292
Offence of demanding or accepting fee or other consideration in relation to grant of benefit
293
Offence of demanding or accepting acknowledgement or undertaking
294
General penalty for offences
295
Time for filing charging document
Part 6Administration
Subpart 1—Guide to this Part
296
What this Part does
Subpart 2—Application, inquiry, and grant
Application
297
Application for benefit: making of, help with, lapse, and deemed receipt
Inquiry
298
MSD must inquire into claim for benefit
299
Exception during epidemic
300
Information gathering, disclosure, and matching
Grant
301
MSD decides whether to grant benefit
302
Immediate provisional grant, and later backdating of other benefit
303
After death of applicant
Subpart 3—Review of entitlement to, or rate of, benefit granted
304
Review of entitlement and rate payable
305
Information for review
306
No entitlement, or entitlement only at different rate
307
Benefit on another eligibility ground more appropriate
308
Another benefit more appropriate
309
Termination of winter energy payment
310
Certain benefits granted, or granted at rate, not taking into account certain insurance payments
Subpart 4—Commencement, stand downs, ending, and expiry and regrant
Commencement of benefits
311
General
​
312
If applicant paid, but claim fails for, ACC weekly compensation
313
Benefits subject to stand down
314
Work-tested benefit of applicant subject to non-entitlement period
315
Exemptions from stand down, and when certain benefits commence
316
Start and calculation of stand-down period
317
Minister may consent to backdating
318
No consent unless benefit not granted earlier because of error
319
Commencement of winter energy payment
Restoration of entitlement after suspension, reduction, cancellation, or non-entitlement
320
Effect of no longer being subject to work-test or young person obligations
321
Effect of no longer being subject to dependent children obligations
322
Effect of no longer being subject to work-preparation obligations
323
Effect of employment on non-entitlement period
324
Effect of participation in certain activities on non-entitlement period
Ending of benefits
325
General rule if person’s entitlement to benefit ceases
326
After death of beneficiary receiving specified benefit
327
Benefits payable to sole parent who stops caring for dependent child due to sudden and uncontrollable circumstances
328
Supported living payment payable to beneficiary who stops caring for another person
329
If child ceases to be entitled to orphan’s benefit or unsupported child’s benefit
330
Supported living payment on ground of restricted work capacity or total blindness and cancelled on medical grounds
Expiry and regrant of specified benefits
331
Expiry date, and specified benefit, defined
332
General rule
333
Exception for specified benefit expiring in week of or before 26 December
334
Exemptions
335
MSD must notify or advise beneficiary
336
Requirements for regrant
Subpart 5—Payment of benefits, tax on benefits, debts and deductions
Payment of benefits
337
How benefits are paid
338
Weekly instalments
​
339
Payment generally to, or on account of, beneficiary personally
340
Required manner of payment: general
341
Required manner of payment: money management for certain payments to young people
342
Money management for certain payments to young people: exception if young person meets prescribed criteria for managing own payments
343
Review and appeal of specified determinations made by MSD under regulations
344
Young person beneficiaries may elect money management
345
Credit on payment card, etc, at end of money management
346
Required manner of payment: payment on death of beneficiary
347
Advance payment of instalments of benefit
348
Requirement for beneficiary, spouse or partner, or both, to undertake budgeting activity
Tax on benefits
349
Interpretation
350
MSD may pay tax on income-tested benefit other than by tax deduction from source deduction payment
351
Status of amount for income tax paid by MSD
352
Recovery amount paid in excess of amount properly payable
Debts and deductions
353
Debts and deductions
354
Recovery of penalty from beneficiary who obtains by fraud amount in excess of entitlement
355
Restriction on imposing penalty under section 354: prosecution for offence
356
Restriction on imposing penalty under section 354: notice and period to respond
357
Restriction on recovering penalty under section 354: decision to be final
358
Recovery from spouse or partner who misleads MSD of excess amount beneficiary obtained
359
Recovery from spouse or partner of apportioned excess amount beneficiary obtained by fraud
360
Obtaining amount by fraud: meaning and proof
361
Recovery from spouse or partner of unapportioned excess amount beneficiary obtained by fraud
362
MSD’s duty to recover debts
363
Duty unaffected by law on mistaken payments
​
Subpart 6—Notices and communications, services, and preferred suppliers
Notices and communications
364
Ways MSD or person can meet requirement to give notice or other document
Young people services
365
Services to encourage young people to move to and remain in education, training, and employment
Goods or services, for beneficiaries or others, supplied by preferred suppliers
366
Preferred suppliers: contracts
367
Preferred suppliers: determinations
368
Preferred suppliers: paying them disability allowance, special assistance, or advance payment
369
Preferred suppliers: paying them disability allowance: exception if total benefit payments less than amount required
370
Preferred suppliers: paying them disability allowance: exception if allowance granted at maximum rate
371
Preferred suppliers: no appeal lies against MSD decisions
372
Preferred suppliers: transitional or savings provisions directions
Administration services provided by contracted service providers
373
Administration service providers: contracts
374
Administration service providers: contents and form of contracts
375
Administration service providers: adoption of existing contracts
376
Administration service providers: MSD to ensure information published
377
Conduct of provider of services in relation to young people to be treated for specified purposes as if MSD’s conduct
378
MSD may assign contracted service provider to young person
Medical services
379
Minister determines rates and conditions of employment and payment
Subpart 7—Reciprocity agreements with other countries
Orders
380
Orders adopting reciprocity agreements
381
Privacy report for orders adopting agreements with mutual assistance provisions
382
Interpretation
Agreements
383
Inclusion of mutual assistance provisions in reciprocity agreements
​
Debt recovery and information exchange
384
MSD may use mutual assistance provisions to recover debts
385
MSD may use mutual assistance provisions to exchange information
Adverse action arising from discrepancy
386
Adverse action against individual if discrepancy shown by information from other country
Subpart 8—Prosecutions and debt-recovery proceedings, and maintenance proceedings
387
Prosecutions and debt recovery proceedings: representation and fees
388
Payment of benefit does not affect right to maintenance
389
Maintenance proceedings
Part 7Reviews and appeals
Subpart 1—Guide to this Part
390
What this Part does
Subpart 2—Reviews by benefits review committee
Rights of review
391
Right to seek review of specified decision of MSD made under delegation
392
Application must be made within 3 months after date of notification or further period allowed
Committee
393
Benefits review committee
Procedure
394
How to begin, and procedure and powers for, review by benefits review committee
Subpart 3—Appeals to appeal authority
Restrictions on appeals
395
Appeals only against decision confirmed or varied by benefits review committee or made by chief executive personally
396
Authority cannot hear and determine certain appeals on medical or capacity grounds
Rights of appeal
397
Decision under specified social assistance enactments
398
Decision under reciprocity agreements
399
Decision to recover excess amount
​
400
Appeal must be begun within 60 working days of notification or further allowed period
Appeal authority
401
Social security appeal authority
402
Act does not affect appeals to authority under other enactments
Procedure
403
How to begin, and procedure and powers for, appeal to authority
404
Notice, and carrying into effect, of decision
Subpart 4—Appeals to courts
Appeals to High Court
405
Right of appeal using case stated on question of law only
406
Appeal must be begun, and case stated lodged, within time prescribed or allowed
407
How to begin, and procedure for, appeal to High Court
408
Orders, etc, on successful appeal
Appeals to Court of Appeal
409
Appeal, with Court of Appeal’s leave, against High Court’s determination
Appeals to Supreme Court
410
Appeal, with Supreme Court’s leave, against High Court’s or Court of Appeal’s determination
Subpart 5—Appeals to medical board
Right of appeal
411
Right of appeal on medical grounds
412
Appeal must be begun within 3 months of notification or further allowed period
Board
413
Board
Procedure
414
How to apply, and procedure and powers, for appeal to board
415
Notice of, and carrying into effect, board’s decision
Part 8Other provisions
Guide to this Part
416
What this Part does
Benefits to be inalienable
417
Benefits cannot, in general, be assigned or charged, or pass by operation of law
​
Regulations
418
Regulations: general
419
Regulations: general powers not limited by special powers
420
Regulations: effect of duties or powers to give directions
421
Regulations: residential requirement
422
Regulations: income exemptions
423
Regulations: accommodation supplement
424
Regulations: childcare assistance
425
Regulations: disability allowance: special categories of eligibility
426
Regulations: use of disability allowance to fund specified expenses
427
Regulations: funeral grants: amounts and methods of payment
428
Regulations: temporary additional support
429
Regulations: participation allowance for people participating in activities
430
Regulations: specific obligations: obligations in relation to dependent children: definitions and attendance
431
Regulations: specific obligations: work-test obligations, and deferrals of, or exemptions from, specified obligations
432
Regulations: factors affecting benefits: pre-benefit activities
433
Regulations: factors affecting benefits: insurance recovery
434
Regulations: factors affecting benefits: overseas pensions
435
Regulations: factors affecting benefits: issue of warrant to arrest beneficiary
436
Regulations: factors affecting benefits: absence from New Zealand
437
Regulations: issue and use of entitlement cards
438
Regulations: application for benefit: making of, help with, lapse, and deemed receipt
439
Regulations: certain benefits granted, or granted at rate, not taking into account certain insurance payments
440
Regulations: exemptions from, and calculation of, stand down
441
Regulations: expiry and regrant of specified benefits
442
Regulations: payments
443
Regulations: payments during epidemic in New Zealand
444
Regulations: debts and deductions
445
Regulations: further provisions on deductions
446
Regulations: advance payment of instalments of benefit
447
Regulations: budgeting activities due to application for advance payment of instalments of benefit
448
Regulations: remittance or suspension of debt
449
Regulations: ways MSD or person can meet requirement to give notice or other document
450
Regulations: reciprocity agreements with mutual assistance provisions, and adverse action if discrepancy shown by information from other country
​
451
Regulations: how to begin, and procedure and powers for, review or appeal
Orders adjusting rates of benefits, etc
452
Orders in Council: discretionary increases in rates of benefits, etc
453
Orders in Council: mandatory annual CPI adjustment of rates of certain benefits that are not main benefits
Confirmable instruments
454
Certain orders are confirmable instruments
Repeals and revocations
455
Social Security Act 1964 repealed
456
Social Welfare (Reciprocity Agreements, and New Zealand Artificial Limb Service) Act 1990 repealed
457
Department of Social Welfare Act 1971 repealed
458
Employment Services and Income Support (Integrated Administration) Act 1998 repealed
Consequential amendments
459
Other enactments amended consequentially
Schedule 1Transitional, savings, and related provisions
Schedule 2Dictionary
Schedule 3Income and liabilities
Schedule 4Rates of benefits
Schedule 5Asset and income limits
Schedule 6Information gathering, disclosure, and matching
Schedule 7Benefits review committees
Schedule 8Appeal authority
Schedule 9Medical board
Schedule 10Consequential amendments
Schedule 11Identified changes in legislation
​
Schedule 12Comparative tables of old and rewritten provisions
The Parliament of New Zealand enacts as follows:
This work is in the public domain because it is listed under the  exempted Governmental works outlined by current New Zealand law. The New Zealand copyright law specifies that "no copyright exists in any of the following works, whenever those works were made". (§ 27).
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1432
Cached time: 20221017211902
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.629 seconds
Real time usage: 0.762 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13589/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 324965/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 81067/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 7/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1337843/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.127/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 3552980/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  570.256      1 -total
 19.58%  111.675    138 Template:TOC_row_1-c-1
 17.21%   98.162    139 Template:Optional_style
 16.96%   96.742    459 Template:LinkedTOC_row_1-1-1
 13.17%   75.079      1 Template:Header
  6.54%   37.281      1 Template:Law-pAct-t
  4.11%   23.459      7 Template:Ts
  3.58%   20.433      1 Template:TOC_begin
  3.57%   20.363      1 Page:Social_Security_Act_2018_(Version_56).pdf/8
  3.25%   18.520      1 Page:Social_Security_Act_2018_(Version_56).pdf/10
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:3315042-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211901 and revision id 10455964.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Social_Security_Act_2018_(Version_56)&oldid=10455964"
Categories: PD-NZGovSocial Security Act 2018
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageSourceDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 17 September 2020, at 22:51.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Executive Order 12253 - Wikisource, the free online library
Executive Order 12253 - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Executive Order 12253
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Executive Order 12253by President of the United StatesCentral Intelligence Agency Retirement and Disability System
◄  Executive Order 12252
1564477
Executive Order 12254  ►
Signed by President Jimmy Carter Tuesday, November 25, 1980
Federal Register page & date: 45 FR 78995, Friday, November 28, 1980
See the Notes section for a listing of Executive Orders affected by or related to the issuance of this Executive Order. more info.
 Executive Order 12253 of November 25, 1980 
 Central Intelligence Agency Retirement and Disability System 
By the authority vested in me as President of the United States of America by Section 292 of the Central Intelligence Agency Retirement Act of 1964 for Certain Employees, as amended (50 U.S.C. 403 note), and in order to conform the Central Intelligence Agency Retirement and Disability System to certain amendments to the Civil Service Retirement and Disability System (Public Law 96-179), it is hereby ordered as follows: 
1-101. The Director of Central Intelligence shall maintain the Central Intelligence Agency Retirement and Disability System in accordance with the following:
(a) Eliminate the "living with" requirement in the case of recognized natural children.
(b) Add a requirement of dependency to the definition of child and define "dependent" as follows: "Dependent," in the case of any child, means that the participant involved was, at the time of the participant's death, either living with or contributing to the support of such child, as determined in accordance with such regulations as the Director shall prescribe.
1-102. The provisions of Section 1-101 are effective as of January 2, 1980.
1-103. The Director of Central Intelligence is authorized to prescribe such regulations as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this Order.
Jimmy Carter
The White House,
November 25, 1980.
Notes[edit]
Shortcut: WS:USEO
 See Related: 
None ascertained
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work of the United States federal government (see 17 U.S.C. 105).
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1399
Cached time: 20221017211902
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.052 seconds
Real time usage: 0.073 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 941/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 12658/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2451/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 10/100
Expensive parser function count: 0/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 0/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.006/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 853965/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%   54.887      1 -total
 53.31%   29.261      1 Template:Potus-eo
 30.31%   16.634      1 Template:PD-USGov
 27.69%   15.196      1 Template:License
 26.20%   14.380      3 Template:Str_number/trim
 17.46%    9.582      1 Template:License_scope
 12.20%    6.697      4 Template:Potus-eo/data
 10.26%    5.632      1 Template:TextQuality
  6.99%    3.834      1 Template:USFR
  3.67%    2.013      2 Template:Font-size
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:1564477-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211902 and revision id 4913513.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Executive_Order_12253&oldid=4913513"
Categories: 75%Executive orders of 1980Executive orders of Jimmy CarterPD-USGov-POTUSPD-USGov
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 31 May 2014, at 07:22.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Anarchy (Malatesta) - Wikisource, the free online library
Anarchy (Malatesta) - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Anarchy (Malatesta)
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
For works with similar titles, see Anarchy.
Anarchy  (1891)  by Errico Malatesta, translated by Freedom Press (London)sister projects: Wikipedia article, Wikidata item.
Originally titled L'anarchia in Italian.  1907 English translation (London:  Freedom Press)
Errico Malatesta123380Anarchy1891Freedom Press (London)
Anarchy is a word that comes from the Greek, and signifies, strictly speaking, "without government": the state of a people without any constituted authority.
Before such an organization had begun to be considered possible and desirable by a whole class of thinkers, so as to be taken as the aim of a movement (which has now become one of the most important factors in modern social warfare), the word "anarchy" was used universally in the sense of disorder and confusion, and it is still adopted in that sense by the ignorant and by adversaries interested in distorting the truth.
We shall not enter into philological discussions, for the question is not philological but historical. The common interpretation of the word does not misconceive its true etymological signification, but is derived from it, owing to the prejudice that government must be a necessity of the organization of social life, and that consequently a society without government must be given up to disorder, and oscillate between the unbridled dominion of some and the blind vengeance of others.
The existence of this prejudice and its influence on the meaning that the public has given to the word is easily explained.
Man, like all living beings, adapts himself to the conditions in which he lives, and transmits by inheritance his acquired habits. Thus, being born and having lived in bondage, being the descendant of a long line of slaves, man, when he began to think, believed that slavery was an essential condition of life, and liberty seemed to him impossible. In like manner, the workman, forced for centuries to depend upon the goodwill of his employer for work, that is, for bread, and accustomed to see his own life at the disposal of those who possess the land and capital, has ended in believing that it is his master who gives him food, and asks ingenuously how it would be possible to live, if there were no master over him?
In the same way, a man whose limbs had been bound from birth, but who had neverless found out how to hobble about, might attribute to the very bands that bound him his ability to move, while, on the contrary, they would diminish and paralyze the muscular energy of his limbs.
If then we add to the natural effect of habit the education given to him by his master, the parson, the teacher, etc., who are all interested in teaching that the employer and the government are necessary, if we add the judge and the policeman to force those who think differently -- and might try to propagate their opinion -- to keep silence, we shall understand how the prejudice as to the utility and necessity of masters and governments has become established. Suppose a doctor brought forward a complete theory, with a thousand ably invented illustrations, to persuade the man with bound limbs that, if his limbs were freed, he could not walk, or even live. The man would defend his bands furiously and consider anyone his enemy who tried to tear them off.
Thus, if it is believed that government is necessary and that without government there must be disorder and confusion, it is natural and logical to suppose that anarchy, which signifies absence of government, must also mean absence of order.
Nor is this fact without parallel in the history of words. In those epochs and countries where people have considered government by one man (monarchy) necessary, the word "republic" (that is, the government of many) has been used precisely like "anarchy," to imply disorder and confusion. Traces of this meaning of the word are still to be found in the popular languages of almost all countries.
When this opinion is changed, and the public are convinced that government is not necessary, but extremely harmful, the word "anarchy," precisely because it signifies "without government," will become equal to saying "natural order, harmony of needs and interests of all, complete liberty with complete solidarity."
Therefore, those are wrong who say that anarchists have chosen their name badly, because it is erroneously understood by the masses and leads to a false interpretation. The error does not come from the word, but from the thing. The difficulty which anarchists meet in spreading their views does not depend upon the name they have given themselves, but upon the fact that their conceptions strike as all the inveterate prejudices which people have about the function of government, or "the state," as it is called.
Before proceeding further, it will be well to explain this last word (the "State") which, in our opinion, is the real cause of much misunderstanding.
Anarchists generally make use if the word "State" to mean all the collection of institutions, political, legislative, judicial, military, financial, etc., by means of which management of their own affairs, the guidance of their personal conduct, and the care of ensuring their own safety are taken from the people and confided to certain individuals, and these, whether by usurpation or delegation, are invested with the right to make laws over and for all, and to constrain the public to respect them, making use of the collective force of the community to this end.
In this case the word "State" means "government," or, if you like, it is the abstract expression of which government is the personification. Then such expressions as "Abolition of the State," or "Society without the State," agree perfectly with the conception which anarchists wish to express of the destruction of every political institution based on authority, and of the constitution of a free and equal society, based upon harmony of interests, and the voluntary contribution of all to the satisfaction of social needs.
However, the word "State" has many other meanings, and among these some that lend themselves to misconstruction, particularly when used among men whose sad social position has not afforded them leisure to become accustomed to the subtle distinction of scientific language, or, still worse, when adopted treacherously by adversaries, who are interested in confounding the sense, or do not wish to comprehend it. Thus the word "State" is often used to indicate any given society, or collection of human beings, united on a given territory and constituting what is called a "social unit," independently of the way in which the members of the said body are grouped, or of the relations existing between them. "State" is used also simply as a synonym for "society." Owning to these meanings of the word, our adversaries believe, or rather profess to believe, that anarchists wish to abolish every social relation and all collective work, and to reduce man to a condition of isolation, that is, to a state worse than savagery.
By "State" again is meant only the supreme administration of a country, the central power, as distinct from provincial or communal power, and therefore others think that anarchists wish merely for a territorial decentralization, leaving the principle of government intact, and thus confounding anarchy with cantonical or communal government.
Finally, "State" signifies "condition, mode of living, the order of social life," etc., and therefore we say, for example, that it is necessary to change the economic state of the working classes, or that the anarchical State is the only State founded on the principles of solidarity, and other similar phrases. So that if we say also in another sense that we wish to abolish the State, we may at once appear absurd or contradictory.
For these reasons, we believe that it would be better to use the expression "abolition of the State" as little as possible, and to substitute for it another, clearer, and more concrete --"abolition of government."
The latter will be the expression used in the course of this essay.
We have said that anarchy is society without government. But is the suppression of government possible, desirable, or wise? Let us see.
What is the government? There is a disease of the human mind, called the metaphysical tendency, that causes man, after he has by a logical process abstracted the quality from an object, to be subject to a kind of hallucination that makes him take the abstraction for the real thing. This metaphysical tendency, in spite of the blows of positive science, has still strong root in the minds of the majority of our contemporary fellowmen. It has such influence that many consider government an actual entity, with certain given attributes of reason, justice, equity, independent of the people who compose the government.
For those who think in this way, government, or the State, is the abstract social power, and it represents, always in the abstract, the general interest. It is the expression of the rights of all and is considered as limited by the rights of each. This way of understanding government is supported by those interested, to whom it is an urgent necessity that the principle of authority should be maintained and should always survive the faults and errors of the persons who exercise power.
For us, the government is the aggregate of the governors, and the governors -- kings, presidents, ministers, members of parliament, and what not -- are those who have the power to make laws regulating the relations between men, and to force obedience to these laws. They are those who decide upon and claim the taxes, enforce military service, judge and punish transgressors of the laws. They subject men to regulations, and supervise and sanction private contracts. They monopolize certain branches of production and public services, or, if they wish, all production and public service. They promote or hinder the exchange of goods. They make war or peace with governments of other countries. They concede or withhold free trade and many things else. In short, the governors are those who have the power, in a greater or lesser degree, to make use of the collective force of society, that is, of the physical, intellectual, and economic force of all, to oblige each to their (the governors') wish. And this power constitutes, in our opinion, the very principle of government and authority.
But what reason is there for the existence of government?
Why abdicate one's own liberty, one's own initiative in favor of other individuals? Why give them the power to be the masters, with or against the wish of each, to dispose of the forces of all in their own way? Are the governors such exceptionally gifted men as to enable them, with some show of reason, to represent the masses and act in the interests of all men better than all men would be able to act for themselves? Are they so infallible and incorruptible that one can confide to them, with any semblance of prudence, the fate of each and all, trusting to their knowledge and goodness?
And even if there existed men of infinite goodness and knowledge, even if we assume what has never happened in history and what we believe could never happen, namely, that the government might devolve upon the ablest and best, would the possession of government power add anything to their beneficent influence? Would it not rather paralyze or destroy it? For those who govern find it necessary to occupy themselves with things which they do not understand, and, above all, to waste the greater part of their energy in keeping themselves in power, striving to satisfy their friends, holding the discontented in check, and mastering the rebellious.
Again, be the governors good or bad, wise or ignorant, how do they gain power? Do they impose themselves by right of war, conquest, or revolution? If so, what guarantees have the public that their rules have the general good at heart? In this case it is simply a question of usurpation, and if the subjects are discontented, nothing is left to them but to throw off the yoke by an appeal to arms. Are the governors chosen from a certain class or party? Then inevitably the ideas and interests of that class or party will triumph, and the wishes and interests of the others will be sacrificed. Are they elected by universal suffrage? Now numbers are the sole criteria, and numbers are clearly no proof of reason, justice, or capacity. Under universal suffrage the elected are those who know best how to take in the masses. The minority, which may happen to be the half minus one, is sacrificed. Moreover, experience has shown it is impossible to hit upon an electoral system that really ensures election by the actual majority.
Many and various are the theories by which men have sought to justify the existence of government. All, however, are founded, confessedly or not, on the assumption that the individuals of a society have contrary interests, and that an external superior power is necessary to oblige some to respect the interests of others, by prescribing and imposing a rule of conduct, according to which each may obtain the maximum of satisfaction with the minimum of sacrifice. If, say the theorists of the authoritarian school, the interests, tendencies, and desires of an individual are in opposition to those of another individual, or perhaps all society, who will have the right and the power to oblige the one to respect the interests of the other or others? Who will be able to prevent the individual citizen from offending the general will? The liberty of each, they say, has for its limit the liberty of others: but who will establish those limits, and who will cause them to be respected? The natural antagonism of interests and passions creates the necessity for government, and justifies authority. Authority intervenes as moderator of the social strife and defines the limits of the rights and duties of each.
This is the theory; but to be sound the theory should be based upon an explanation of facts. We know well how in social economy theories are too often invented to justify facts, that is, to defend privilege and cause it to be accepted tranquilly by those who are its victims. Let us here look at the facts themselves.
In all the course of history, as in the present epoch, government is either brutal, violent, arbitrary domination of the few over the many, or it is an instrument devised to secure domination and privilege to those who, by force, or cunning, or inheritance, have taken to themselves all the means of life, first and foremost the soil, whereby they hold the people in servitude, making them work for their advantage.
Governments oppress mankind in two ways, either directly, by brute force, that is physical violence, or indirectly, by depriving them of the means of subsistence and thus reducing them to helplessness. Political power originated in the first method; economic privilege arose from the second. Governments can also oppress man by acting on his emotional nature, and in this way constitute religious authority. There is no reason for the propagation of religious superstitions but that they defend and consolidate political and economic privileges.
In primitive society, when the world was not so densely populated as now and social relations were less complicated, if any circumstance prevented the formation of habits and customs of solidarity, or destroyed those which already existed and established the domination of man over man, the two powers, political and economic, were united in the same hands -- often in those of a single individual. Those who by force had conquered and impoverished the others, constrained them to become their servants and to perform all things according to their caprice. The victors were at once proprietors, legislators, kings, judges, and executioners.
But with the increase of population, with the growth of needs, with the complication of social relationships, the prolonged continuance of such despotism became impossible. For their own security the rulers, often much against their will, were obliged to depend upon a privileged class, that is, a certain number of cointerested individuals, and were also obliged to let each of these individuals provide for his own sustenance. Nevertheless they reserved to themselves the supreme or ultimate control. In other words, the rulers reserved to themselves the right to exploit all at their own convenience, and so to satisfy their kingly vanity. Thus private wealth was developed under the shadow of the ruling power, for its protection and -- often unconsciously -- as its accomplice. The class of proprietors arose, and, concentrated little by little into their hands all the means of production, the very fountain of life -- agriculture, industry, and exchange -- ended by becoming a power in themselves. This power, by the superiority of its means of action and the great mass of interests it embraces, always ends by subjugating more or less openly the political power, that is, the government, which it makes its policeman.
This phenomenon has been repeated often in history. Every time that, by military enterprise, physical brute force has taken the upper hand in society, the conquerors have shown the tendency to concentrate government and property in their own hands. In every case, however, because the government cannot attend to the production of wealth and overlook and direct everything, it finds it necessary to conciliate a powerful class, and private property is again established. With it comes the division of the two sorts of society, and that of the persons who control the collective force of society, and that of the proprietors, upon whom these governors become essentially dependent, because the proprietors command the sources of the said collective force.
Never has this state of affairs been so accentuated as in modern times. The development of production, the immense extension of commerce, the extensive power that money has acquired, and all the economic results flowing from the discovery of America, the invention of machinery, etc., have secured the supremacy to the capitalist class that it is no longer content to trust to the support of the government and has come to wish that the government composed of members from its own class, continually under its control and specially organized to defend it against the possible revenge of the disinherited. Hence the origin of the modern parliamentary system.
Today the government is composed of proprietors, or people of their class so entirely under their influence that the richest do not find it necessary to take an active part themselves. Rothschild, for instance, does not need to be either M.P. or minister, it is enough for him to keep M.P.'s and ministers dependent upon him.
In many countries, the proletariat participates nominally in the election of the government. This is a concession which the bourgeois (i.e., proprietory) class have made, either to avail themselves of popular support in the strife against royal or aristocratic power, or to divert the attention of the people from their own emancipation by giving them an apparent share in political power. However, whether the bourgeoisie foresaw it or not, when first they conceded to the people the right to vote, the fact is that the right has proved in reality a mockery, serving only to consolidate the power of the bourgeoisie, while giving to the most energetic only of the proletariat the illusory hope of arriving at power.
So also with universal suffrage -- we might say, especially with universal suffrage -- the government has remained the servant and police of the bourgeois class. How could it be otherwise? If the government should reach the point of becoming hostile, if the hope of democracy should ever be more than a delusion deceiving the people, the proprietory class, menaced in its interests would at once rebel and would use all the force and influence that come from the possession of wealth, to reduce the government to the simple function of acting as policeman.
In all times and in all places, whatever may be the name of that the government takes, whatever has been its origin, or its organization, its essential function is always that of oppressing and exploiting the masses, and of defending the oppressors and exploiters. Its principal characteristic and indispensable instruments are the policeman and the tax collector, the soldier and the prison. And to these are necessarily added the time serving priest or teacher, as the case may be, supported and protected by the government, to render the spirit of the people servile and make them docile under the yoke.
Certainly, in addition to this primary business, to this essential department of governmental action other departments have been added in the course of time. We even admit that never, or hardly ever, has a government been able to exist in a country that was civilized without adding to its oppressing and exploiting functions others useful and indispensable to social life. But this fact makes it nonetheless true that government is in its nature a means of exploitation, and that its position doom it to be the defense of a dominant class, thus confirming and increasing the evils of domination.
The government assumes the business of protecting, more or less vigilantly, the life of citizens against direct or brutal attacks; acknowledges and legalizes a certain number of rights and primitive usages and customs, without which it is impossible to live in society. It organizes and directs certain public services, such as the post, preservation of the public health, benevolent institutions, workhouses, etc., and poses as the protector and benefactor of the poor and weak. But to prove our point it is sufficient to notice how and why it fulfills these functions. The fact is that everything the government undertakes is always inspired with the spirit of domination and intended to defend, enlarge, and perpetuate the privileges of property and of those classes of which the government is representative and defender.
A government cannot rule for any length of time without hiding its true nature behind the pretense of general utility. It cannot respect the lives of the privileged without assuming the air of wishing to respect the lives of all. It cannot cause the privileges of some to be tolerated without appearing as the custodian of the rights of everyone. "The law" (and, of course, those who have made the law, i.e., the government) "has utilized," says Kropotkin, "the social sentiments of man, working into them those precepts of morality, which man has accepted, together with arrangements useful to the minority -- the exploiters -- and opposed to the interests of those who might have rebelled, had it not been for this show of a moral ground."
A government cannot wish the destruction of the community, for then it and the dominant class could not claim their wealth from exploitation; nor could the government leave the community to manage its own affairs, for then the people would soon discover that it (the government) was necessary for no other end than to defend the proprietory class who impoverish them, and would hasten to rid themselves of both government and proprietory class.
Today, in the face of the persistent and menacing demands of the proletariat, governments show a tendency to interfere in the relations between employers and work people. Thus they try to arrest the labor movement and to impede with delusive reforms the attempts of the poor to take to themselves what is due to them, namely, an equal share of the good things of life that others enjoy.
We must also remember that on one hand the bourgeoisie, that is, the proprietory class, make war among themselves and destroy one another continually, and that, on the other hand, the government, although composed of the bourgeoisie and, acting as their servants and protector, is still, like every servant or protector, continually striving to emancipate itself and to domineer over its charge. Thus, this seesaw game, this swaying between conceding and withdrawing, this seeking allies among the people and against the classes, and among classes against the masses, forms the science of the governors and blinds the ingenuous and phlegmatic, who are always expecting that salvation is coming to them from on high.
With all this, the government does not change its nature. If it acts as regulator or guarantor of the rights and duties of each, it perverts the sentiments of justice. It justifies wrong and punishes every act that offends or menaces the privileges of the governors and proprietors. It declares just and legal the most atrocious exploitation of the miserable, which means a slow and continuous material and moral murder, perpetrated by those who have on those who have not. Again, if it administers public services, it always considers the interests of the governors and proprietors, not occupying itself with the interests of the working masses, except insofar as is necessary to make the masses willing to endure their share of taxation. If it instructs, it fetters and curtails the truth, and tends to prepare the minds and hearts of the young to become either implacable tyrants or docile slaves, according to the class to which they belong. In the hands of the government everything becomes a means of exploitation, everything serves as a police measure, useful to hold the people in check. And it must be thus. If the life of mankind consists in strife between man and man, naturally there must be conquerors and conquered, and the government, which is the means of securing to the victors the results of their victory and perpetuating those results, will certainly never fall to those who have lost, whether the battle be on the grounds of physical or intellectual strength, or in the field of economics. And those who have fought to secure to themselves better conditions than others can have, to win privilege and add domination to power, and have attained the victory, will certainly not use it to defend the rights of the vanquished, and to place limits to their own power and to that of their friends and partisans.
The government -- or the State, if you will -- as judge, moderator of social strife, impartial administrator of the public interests, is a lie, an illusion, a Utopia, never realized and never realizable. If, in fact, the interests of men must always be contrary to one another, if, indeed, the strife between mankind has made laws necessary to human society, and the liberty of the individual must be limited by the liberty of other individuals, then each one would always seek to make his interests triumph over those of others. Each would strive to enlarge his own liberty at the cost of the liberty of others, and there would be government. Not simply because it was more or less useful to the totality of the members of society to have a government, but because the conquerors would wish to secure themselves the fruits of victory. They would wish effectually to subject the vanquished and relieve themselves of the trouble of being always on the defensive, and they would appoint men, specially adapted to the business, to act as police. Were this indeed actually the case, then humanity would be destined to perish amid periodical contests between the tyranny of the dominators and the rebellion of the conquered.
But fortunately the future of humanity is a happier one, because the law that governs it is milder.
Thus, in the contest of centuries between liberty and authority, or, in other words, between social equality and social castes, the question at issue has not really been the relations between society and the individual, or the increase of individual independence at the cost of social control, or vice versa. Rather it has had to do with preventing any one individual from oppressing the others; with giving to everyone the same rights and the same means of action. It has had to do with substituting the initiative of all, which must naturally result in the advantage of all, for the initiative of the few, which necessarily results in the suppression of all the others. It is always, in short, the question of putting an end to the domination and exploitation of man by man in such a way that all are interested in the common welfare, and that the individual force of each, instead of oppressing, combating, or suppressing others, will find the possibility of complete development, and everyone will seek to associate with others for the greater advantage of all.
From what we have said, it follows that the existence of a government, even upon the hypothesis that the ideal government of authoritarian socialists were possible, far from producing an increase of productive force, would immensely diminish it, because the government would restrict initiative to the few. It would give these few the right to do all things, without being able, of course, to endow them with the knowledge or understanding of all things.
In fact, if you divest legislation and all the operations of government of what is intended to protect the privileged, and what represents the wishes of the privileged classes alone, nothing remains but the aggregate of individual governors. "The State," says Sismondi, "is always a conservative power which authorizes, regulates, and organizes the conquests of progress (and history testifies that it applies them to the profit of its own and the other privileged classes) but never does it inaugurate them. New ideas always originate from beneath, are conceived in the foundations of society, and then, when divulged, they become opinion and grow. But they must always meet on their path, and combat the constituted powers of tradition, custom, privilege and error."
In order to understand how society could exist without a government, it is sufficient to turn our attention for a short space to what actually goes on in our present society. We shall see that in reality the most important functions are fulfilled even nowadays outside the intervention of government. Also that government only interferes to exploit the masses, or defend the privileged, or, lastly, to sanction, most unnecessarily, all that has been done without its aid, often in spite of and opposition to it. Men work, exchange, study, travel, follow as they choose the current rules of morality or hygiene; they profit by the progress of science and art, have numberless mutual interests without ever feeling the need of ant one to direct them how to conduct themselves in regard to these matters. On the contrary, it is just those things in which no governmental interference that prosper best and give rise to the least contention, being unconsciously adapted to the wish of all in the way found most useful and agreeable.
Nor is government more necessary for large undertakings, or for those public services which require the constant cooperation of many people of different conditions and countries. Thousands of these undertakings are even now the work of voluntarily formed associations. And these are, by the acknowledgment of everyone, the undertakings that succeed the best. We do not refer to the associations of capitalists, organized by means of exploitation, although even they show capabilities and powers of free association, which may extended until it embraces all the people of all lands and includes the widest and most varying interests. We speak rather of those associations inspired by the love of humanity, or by the passion for knowledge, or even simply by the desire for amusement and love of applause, as these represent better such groupings as will exist in a society where, private property and internal strife between men being abolished, each will find his interests compatible with the interest of everyone else and his greatest satisfaction in doing good and pleasing others. Scientific societies and congresses, international lifeboat and Red Cross associations, laborers' unions, peace societies, volunteers who hasten to the rescue at times of great public calamity, are all examples, among thousands, of that power of the spirit of association which always shows itself when a need arises or an enthusiasm takes hold, and the means do not fail. That voluntary associations do not cover the world and do not embrace every branch of material and moral activity is the fault of the obstacles placed in their way by governments, of the antagonisms create by the possession of private property, and of the impotence and degradation to which the monopolizing of wealth on the part of the few reduces the majority of mankind.
The government takes charge, for instance, of the postal and telegraph services. But in what way does it really assist them? When the people are in such a condition as to be able to enjoy and feel the need of such services they will think about organizing them, and the man with the necessary technical knowledge will not require a certificate from a government to enable him to set to work. The more general and urgent the need, the more volunteers will offer to satisfy it. Would the people have the ability necessary to provide and distribute provisions? Never fear, they will not die of hunger waiting for government to pass a law on the subject. Wherever a government exists, it must wait until the people have first organized everything, and then come with its laws to sanction and exploit what has already been done. It is evident that private interest is the great motive for all activity. That being so, when the interest of every one becomes the interest of each (and it necessarily will become so as soon as private property is abolished), then all will be active. If they work now in the interest of the few, so much more and so much better will they work to satisfy the interests of all. It is hard to understand how anyone can believe that public services indispensable to social life can be better secured by order of a government than through the workers themselves who by their own choice or by agreement with others carry them out under the immediate control of all those interested.
Certainly in every collective undertaking on a large scale there is need for division of labor, for technical direction, administration, etc. But the authoritarians are merely playing with words, when they deduce a reason for the existence of government, from the very real necessity for organization of labor. The government, we must repeat, is the aggregate of the individuals who have received or have taken the right or the mean to make laws, and force the people to obey them. The administrators, engineers, etc., on the other hand, are men who receive or assume the charge of doing a certain work. Government signifies delegation of power, that is, abdication of the initiative and sovereignty of everyone into the hand of the few. Administration signifies delegation of work, that is, the free exchange of services founded on free agreement.
  This work is a translation and has a separate copyright status to the applicable copyright protections of the original content.
Original:
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published before January 1, 1927.
The author died in 1932, so this work is also in the public domain in countries and areas where the copyright term is the author's life plus 80 years or less. This work may also be in the public domain in countries and areas with longer native copyright terms that apply the rule of the shorter term to foreign works.
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
Translation:
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published before January 1, 1927.
The author died in 1932, so this work is also in the public domain in countries and areas where the copyright term is the author's life plus 80 years or less. This work may also be in the public domain in countries and areas with longer native copyright terms that apply the rule of the shorter term to foreign works.
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1441
Cached time: 20221017211904
Cache expiry: 86400
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.106 seconds
Real time usage: 0.150 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 593/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 52986/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12691/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 0/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.046/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 2117954/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 2/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  120.002      1 -total
 53.10%   63.721      1 Template:Header
 26.12%   31.346      1 Template:Translation_licence
 20.62%   24.750      1 Template:Similar
 17.04%   20.449      1 Template:License_container_begin
 15.67%   18.810      1 Template:Collapsible_box
 13.51%   16.214      2 Template:PD/US
 10.74%   12.891      2 Template:PD-old-80-US
  9.51%   11.407      2 Template:PD-old/US
  8.69%   10.433      1 Template:Header/main_block
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:123380-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211903 and revision id 10781494.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Anarchy_(Malatesta)&oldid=10781494"
Categories: 1891 worksPamphletsWorks originally in ItalianPD-old-80-US
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
EspañolFrançaisItaliano
Edit links
 This page was last edited on 31 December 2020, at 02:53.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Romance of History, Mexico - Wikisource, the free online library
Romance of History, Mexico - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Romance of History, Mexico
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
←Contents
Romance of History, Mexico  (1909)  by Margaret Duncan CoxheadPreface→
related portals: Mexico.sister projects: Wikidata item.
776128Romance of History, Mexico1909Margaret Duncan Coxhead
​
​
ROMANCE OF HISTORY
MEXICO
BY
MARGARET DUNCAN COXHEAD
WITH TWELVE REPRODUCTIONS IN COLOUR OF ORIGINAL
DRAWINGS BY J. H. ROBINSON
NEW YORK
FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY
PUBLISHERS
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published before January 1, 1927. It may be copyrighted outside the U.S. (see Help:Public domain).
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1320
Cached time: 20221017211904
Cache expiry: 86400
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.100 seconds
Real time usage: 0.281 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 582/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 14278/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4836/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 3621/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.029/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1473191/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  143.439      1 -total
 43.82%   62.850      1 Template:Header
 20.93%   30.017      1 Page:Romance_of_History,_Mexico.djvu/11
 19.49%   27.951      1 Template:Center
  9.70%   13.913      1 Template:PD-US
  8.37%   12.002      1 Template:License
  7.74%   11.098      1 Template:Header/main_block
  5.69%    8.164      1 Template:Letter-spacing
  5.55%    7.964      1 Template:Smallrefs
  3.43%    4.925      1 Template:Optional_style
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:776128-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211904 and revision id 10796782.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Romance_of_History,_Mexico&oldid=10796782"
Categories: 1909 worksHistory of MexicoPD-US
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageSourceDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 2 January 2021, at 04:50.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Law of the People's Republic of China on the People's Armed Police (2020) - Wikisource, the free online library
Law of the People's Republic of China on the People's Armed Police (2020) - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Law of the People's Republic of China on the People's Armed Police (2020)
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
←Law of the People's Republic of Chinaon the People's Armed Police (2009)
Law of the People's Republic of Chinaon the People's Armed Police  (2020)   
    sister projects: Wikidata item.
(Adopted at the Tenth Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Eleventh National People's Congress on August 27, 2009 and amended at the Nineteenth Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Thirteenth National People's Congress on 20 June 2020)
3595254Law of the People's Republic of Chinaon the People's Armed Police2020
Contents
1 Chapter I   General Provisions
2 Chapter II   Organization and Command
3 Chapter III   Missions and Competence
4 Chapter IV   Obligations and Discipline
5 Chapter V   Support for Missions
6 Chapter VI   Supervision and Inspection
7 Chapter VII   Legal Liabilities
8 Chapter VIII   Supplementary Provisions
Chapter I   General Provisions[edit]
Article 1 This Law is enacted for the purposes of regulating and guaranteeing the performance of functions by the People's Armed Police (PAP), building a strong and modernized PAP, maintaining national security and social stability, and protecting the legitimate rights and interests of citizens, legal persons and other organizations.
Article 2 The PAP is a key component of the armed forces of the People's Republic of China. The PAP is under the centralized and unified leadership of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and the Central Military Commission (CMC).
Article 3 The PAP shall uphold the absolute leadership of the Communist Party of China, implement Xi Jinping Thought on Strengthening the Military and the military strategic guideline for a new era, strengthen military training and improve combat readiness, adhere to strict law-based governance, accelerate its construction and development, and perform duties efficiently in accordance with the strategic requirements of performing multiple functions, maintaining stability and safeguarding rights.
Article 4 The PAP shall be responsible for guard duties, addressing social security emergencies, preventing and responding to terrorist activities, maritime rights protection and law enforcement, disaster rescue and relief, defensive operations and other missions assigned by the CMC.
Article 5 The PAP shall abide by the Constitution and laws, faithfully discharge and perform functions in accordance with the provisions of this Law and other relevant laws.
The acts of the PAP in discharging its functions and duties in accordance with law shall be protected by law.
Article 6 PAP officers who make outstanding contributions in the execution of their missions shall be commended and awarded in accordance with relevant laws and regulations of the CMC.
Individuals and organizations that make outstanding contributions in assisting the PAP in carrying out its missions shall be commended and awarded in accordance with relevant laws and regulations.
Article 7 The PAP adopts the system of ranks with its contents separately prescribed in other laws.
Article 8 PAP officers enjoy the rights and interests of active duty service members as prescribed by laws and regulations.
Chapter II   Organization and Command[edit]
Article 9 The PAP consists of internal security force, mobile force, coast guard, academies and research institutions, etc.
The internal security force is organized according to administrative divisions, the mobile force according to missions, the coast guard according to administrative divisions and mission-designated districts in coastal areas. Specific organizational structure shall be determined by the CMC.
Article 10 PAP units, when executing missions in peacetime, shall be organized and commanded by the CMC, or by the PAP when authorized by the CMC.
PAP units, when participating in non-war military operations in peacetime with the People's Liberation Army such as disaster rescue and relief, stability maintenance, emergency response, and joint training exercises, shall be commanded by the Theater Commands (TCs) under the authorization of the CMC.
PAP units, when executing missions in wartime, shall be organized and commanded by the CMC or by the TCs under the authorization of the CMC.
Specific methods of organization and command shall be determined by the CMC.
Article 11  Central state organs and local people's governments at or above county level shall establish mechanisms with the PAP for mission requests and coordination.
Where central state organs and local people's governments at or above county level need the assistance of the PAP for security guard for major events, the handling of social security emergencies,  prevention of and response to terrorist activities, and disaster rescue and relief, they shall make requests in accordance with relevant state provisions.
The entity in need of such services may make requests to the PAP units on duty.
Article 12  The deployment of the PAP for missions shall be subject to relevant laws and a strict approval process, and be in accordance with the PAP's command structure, responsibilities and authorities and operational mechanisms. The approval authority and procedures shall be prescribed by the CMC.
In the event of a major disaster, dangerous situation or violent terrorist incident or other emergency that seriously threatens public security or the citizens' personal and property safety, the PAP shall take action and report simultaneously in accordance with relevant provisions issued by the CMC.
Article 13  The PAP shall, as the situation warrants, join the commanding units established by the central state organs or local people's governments at or above county level. The organization and command shall be under the leadership of the commanding units in accordance with relevant provisions of the CMC.
Article 14  Central state organs or local people's governments at or above county level will provide operational guidance to the PAP in the performance of guard duties, handling of social security emergencies, prevention of and response to terrorist activities, and participation in disaster rescue and relief.
The guarded entity may provide operational guidance to the PAP deployed on site for missions such as armed guard, armed protection, armed security protection, armed sentry, escorting, transportation, etc.. 
Chapter III   Missions and Competence[edit]
Article 15 The PAP executes the following guard duties:
(1) armed guard for individuals and key targets;
(2) security guard for major events;
(3) armed protection over critical sections of key entities, such as critical public facilities, nuclear facilities, enterprises, warehouses, water sources, water conservancies, power facilities and communication hubs;
(4) armed security protection over important bridges and tunnels;
(5) armed sentry over the peripheral areas of prisons and detention houses;
(6) armed patrols in the key areas of municipalities, cities which are the seat of the people's government of a province or an autonomous region, and other important cities (towns), or during special periods or along designated inland borders;
(7) assistance to public security organs and national security organs in carrying out arrest and pursuit tasks in accordance with law; assistance to guarded entities including prisons and detention houses, in performing escort and pursuit tasks; and assistance to guarded entities including the People's Bank of China, military industrial institutions and enterprises for national defense, in carrying out escort tasks.
The specific scope of duties provided in the preceding paragraphs shall be implemented in accordance with relevant state regulations.
Article 16  The PAP, when addressing unrest, riots, turmoil, illegal gatherings, mass disturbances and other emergencies, is responsible for:
(1) protecting key targets;
(2) blocking and controlling relevant places and roads;
(3) implementing isolation, guidance, removal and dispersal operations to stop illegal and criminal acts;
(4) rescuing and saving stranded persons;
(5) conducting armed patrols, assisting in carrying out the mass work and restoring social order.
Article 17  The PAP, when participating in the prevention of and response to terrorist activities, mainly:
(1) performs on-site control, rescue and relief, armed patrols and sentry of key targets;
(2) assists public security organs in arresting and pursuing persons involved in the terrorist activities;
(3) rescues hostages and removes explosives;
(4) participates in responding to the hijacking of aircraft and other vehicles.
Article 18  The PAP, when participating in rescue and relief following a natural disaster, an accident or a public health emergency, is mainly engaged in:
(1) the search, rescue, transfer or evacuation of stranded persons;
(2) guard over the peripheries of dangerous areas, hazardous sites and cordoned sections;
(3) the removal and control of disasters and dangers to prevent secondary and derivative disasters;
(4) nuclear-biochemical rescue, medical rescue, epidemic prevention and control, emergency repair and construction of traffic facilities and other specialized operations; and
(5) the rescue, transportation and transfer of important materials.
Article 19 PAP officers, when executing missions, according to law, may:
(1) check persons, articles and vehicles entering or leaving the cordoned sections or passing through checkpoints in accordance with relevant regulations; stop those not allowed to enter, leave or pass through the cordoned sections; take necessary measures to stop those attempting to forcibly enter, leave or pass through the cordoned sections;
(2) during an armed patrol, upon the approval of the site commander and presentation of the PAP identification, question suspects and examine their identification on the spot, and inspect suspicious articles and vehicles;
(3) assist in the execution of traffic control or site control;
(4) take necessary measures to restrain, remove or disperse those who gather to disrupt social order, endanger the personal or property security of citizens, or endanger public security or the security of the guarded targets; and
(5) request information from the relevant entities and personnel, or make necessary reconnaissance on sites related to the execution of the task.
Article 20  In executing missions, the PAP shall, upon the approval of the site commander, promptly detain and transfer to public security organs, national security organs or other authorities having jurisdiction, any individual who is found to be:
(1) committing a crime;
(2) wanted;
(3) illegally carrying articles which endanger public security;
(4) committing an act which endangers the security of the guarded targets;
(5) obstructing the PAP's missions by violence or threats.
Article 21  The PAP shall assist public security organs, national security organs, and prisons in carrying out arrests and pursuits; and assist, in accordance with the decisions of the said organs, in searching suspects, defendants, convicts and their residences as well as any places and vehicles that are suspected of concealing the suspects, defendants, convicts or illegal articles.
Article 22  The PAP officers may use police equipment and weaponry in executing guard duties, addressing social security emergencies and preventing and responding to terrorist activities. The usage shall be governed by the regulations on the use of police equipment and weaponry by the people's police and other relevant laws and regulations.
Article 23  Where the PAP encounters obstruction or interference when executing missions, it may take necessary measures to remove the obstruction and interference.
Where the PAP has to take necessary measures in the execution of missions, such measures shall be strictly restrained to the necessary limits. Where there are multiple measures to choose from, the PAP shall choose the one that is conducive to the optimal protection of the rights and interests of individuals and organizations.
Article 24  The PAP may, when in urgent execution of missions, have the priority to public transport upon presenting identification, and have the priority in passing in case of traffic block.
Article 25 The PAP may, under urgent circumstances in a mission, and upon presentation of its identification by the commanding officer on the site, have priority to the use or requisition, in accordance with the law, of the equipment, facilities, sites, buildings, transport and other supplies and materials belonging to organizations or individuals. The PAP shall promptly return or restore them to their original state upon the completion of missions, and make payments for the use in accordance with relevant provisions of the state. If any loss or damage is caused, compensation shall be awarded in accordance with relevant regulations of the state.
Article 26  The PAP's execution of missions abroad, such as preventing and responding to terrorist activities, is governed by relevant laws, regulations and the provisions of the CMC. 
Chapter IV   Obligations and Discipline[edit]
Article 27  The PAP shall obey orders and commands, fulfill functions in accordance with law, and resolutely accomplish missions.
Article 28  The PAP shall provide timely assistance to any citizen whose personal and property safety is endangered or who is in other dangerous situations.
Article 29  PAP officers may not:
(1) disobey decisions and orders from superiors, act passively or desert from missions;
(2) use police equipment or weaponry in violation of regulations;
(3) unlawfully deprive of or restrict any person's personal liberty, or inspect or search any person, article, transport, domicile or place;
(4) corporally punish, mistreat or beat individuals under custody and control;
(5) abuse power, or practice favoritism and commit irregularities, absence without leave or neglect of duty;
(6) cover up or connive at illegal or criminal activities;
(7) divulge national or military secrets, or
(8) commit other legal or disciplinary offences.
Article 30  When executing missions, PAP officers shall be dressed in accordance with applicable provisions, hold identification, use video recording equipment to collect evidence and present their identification in accordance with relevant regulations.
Article 31  The PAP shall serve with politeness and courtesy, observe social morality, and respect citizens' religious beliefs, ethnic conventions and customs.
Chapter V   Support for Missions[edit]
Article 32  To support the PAP in carrying out its missions, central state organs, local people's governments at or above county level and relevant departments thereof based on their responsibilities, shall promptly notify the PAP of:
(1) social security situations;
(2) intelligence about terrorist incidents and emergencies;
(3) meteorological, hydrological, marine environmental and geospatial conditions, as well as early warning of disasters;
(4) other intelligence in relation to the PAP's missions being executed.
Central state organs and local people's governments at or above county level shall establish mechanisms to share intelligence and information with the PAP. Mission-related intelligence, information and data shall be provided by security information networks, intelligence information systems and databases.
The relevant information obtained by the PAP shall be kept strictly confidential and utilized lawfully.
Article 33  The state shall establish a funding mechanism commensurate with economic and social development and coordinated with the missions and the development needs of the PAP. The funding shall be budgeted in accordance with relevant provisions of the state.
Article 34  The guarded entity and its superior authorities shall, in accordance with relevant provisions of the state, provide the PAP on duty with necessary support, such as living facilities and those needed in the mission.
Article 35  When executing missions in a location with potential exposure to harmful pollutants, such as toxic substances, dust, radiation or noise, or to harsh conditions, such as extreme temperatures or low levels of oxygen, PAP officers shall be provided with the same protection, benefit, and subsidies as are provided to the staff of the guarded entity, by the guarded entity or the superior authorities thereof.
Article 36  The specialized insignia, uniform, equipment, identification and seals of the PAP shall be manufactured and equipped in accordance with relevant provisions issued by the CMC.
Article 37  The PAP shall, as missions require, strengthen the education and training of officers, in order to improve their ability to carry out missions in accordance with the law.
Article 38  If PAP officers are injured, disabled or killed during the execution of their missions, pensions and preferential treatment shall be given in accordance with relevant provisions for servicemen issued by the state.
Article 39  Citizens, legal persons, and other organizations shall provide necessary support and assistance to the PAP in carrying out its missions in accordance with the law.
The acts of citizens, legal persons and other organizations assisting the PAP in performing its missions are protected by law.
Citizens that die or are disabled or legal persons and other organizations that have suffered property damage as a result of assisting the PAP in carrying out its missions shall be awarded pensions and preferential treatment or compensation in accordance with relevant provisions of the state.
Chapter VI   Supervision and Inspection[edit]
Article 40  The PAP shall supervise and inspect the implementation of laws and regulations and the observance of discipline by its units and personnel thereof.
Article 41 The PAP is under the supervision of the Supervisory Committee of the CMC and the Supervisory Committees of the PAP at all levels.
The PAP, when executing guard duties, dealing with social security emergencies,  preventing and responding to terrorist activities, maritime rights protection and law enforcement, disaster rescue and relief shall be supervised by the people's governments and relevant departments thereof, citizens, legal persons and other organizations.
Article 42  Upon receiving any reports or complaints from citizens, legal persons or other organizations, or upon receiving any notifications on PAP's violation of laws or discipline from the people's governments at or above county level or their relevant departments, the Supervisory Committee of the CMC and the Supervisory Committees of the PAP at all levels shall investigate and address the issues in a timely manner. The results shall be notified to the citizens, legal persons or organizations that file the report or complaint, or the people's governments at or above county level or the relevant departments thereof.
Chapter VII   Legal Liabilities[edit]
Article 43 PAP officers failing to perform their duty in a mission, or committing any act prescribed in Article 29 of this Law, shall be subject to sanctions in accordance with relevant provisions of the CMC.
Article 44 Individuals or entities shall be subject to the public security administration penalties by public security organs in accordance with law, if obstructing the PAP in the performance of its missions by:
(1) insulting, threatening, blocking, intercepting or assaulting PAP officers on missions;
(2) forcing their way through cordoned areas set up by the PAP;
(3) refusing or obstructing the PAP in carrying out missions, such as pursuing, checking, searching, rescuing or guarding;
(4) obstructing the passage of PAP officers on mission or their vehicles; or
(5) committing other acts that severely obstruct the PAP in the execution of its missions. 
Article 45  Individuals or entities that illegally manufacture, trade in, possess or use the specialized insignia, equipment, identification and seals of the PAP shall be subject to detention for no more than 15 days or a warning, and may be fined 1 to 5 times the amount of illegal gains by public security organs. 
Article 46  Any person who violates the provisions of this Law and constitutes a criminal offence shall be held criminally liable in accordance with the law.    
Chapter VIII   Supplementary Provisions[edit]
Article 47  The enforcement of maritime rights by the PAP shall be separately regulated by other laws. 
Article 48  The PAP shall execute defensive operations in accordance with the commands of the CMC. 
Article 49  The PAP shall execute martial law missions in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Martial Law of the People's Republic of China. 
Article 50  Civilian staff of the PAP, when executing missions prescribed in this Law, shall perform relevant functions and obligations of the PAP and enjoy the corresponding rights and interests.
Article 51  This Law shall come into force on June 21, 2020.
  This work is a translation and has a separate copyright status to the applicable copyright protections of the original content.
Original:
This work is in the public domain because it is exempted by Article 5 of Chinese copyright law. This exempts all Chinese government and judicial documents, and their official translations, from copyright. It also exempts simple factual information, and calendars, numerical tables, and other forms of general use and formulas.
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
Translation:
This work is in the public domain because it is exempted by Article 5 of Chinese copyright law. This exempts all Chinese government and judicial documents, and their official translations, from copyright. It also exempts simple factual information, and calendars, numerical tables, and other forms of general use and formulas.
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1323
Cached time: 20221017211905
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.093 seconds
Real time usage: 0.129 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 449/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 22523/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11993/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 0/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 0/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.043/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1408721/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  101.261      1 -total
 76.15%   77.115      1 Template:Header
 23.68%   23.982      1 Template:Translation_license
 17.53%   17.754      1 Template:License_container_begin
 16.11%   16.314      1 Template:Collapsible_box
 11.86%   12.009      1 Template:Header/main_block
 11.57%   11.716      2 Template:PD-CN
  8.51%    8.616      1 Template:License
  4.85%    4.912      2 Template:License_scope
  3.88%    3.927      1 Template:License_container_end
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:3595254-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211904 and revision id 11145172.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Law_of_the_People%27s_Republic_of_China_on_the_People%27s_Armed_Police_(2020)&oldid=11145172"
Categories: 2020 worksPD-CNLaws of the People's Republic of China
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
中文
Edit links
 This page was last edited on 1 April 2021, at 03:00.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Miller v. United States (357 U.S. 301) - Wikisource, the free online library
Miller v. United States (357 U.S. 301) - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Miller v. United States (357 U.S. 301)
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Miller v. United States (357 U.S. 301) by William J. Brennan, Jr.Syllabusrelated portals: Supreme Court of the United States.sister projects: Wikipedia article, Wikidata item.
915166Miller v. United States (357 U.S. 301) — SyllabusWilliam J. Brennan, Jr.
Court Documents
Opinion of the Court
Concurring Opinion
Harlan
Dissenting Opinion
Clark
United States Supreme Court357 U.S. 301Miller  v.  United States (357 U.S. 301) Argued: Jan. 28, 1958. --- Decided: June 23, 1958
Mr. De Long Harris, Washington, D.C., for petitioner.
Mr. Leonard B. Sand, Washington, D.C., for respondent.
Mr. Justice BRENNAN delivered the opinion of the Court. 
Notes[edit]
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work of the United States federal government (see 17 U.S.C. 105).
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1321
Cached time: 20221017211905
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.079 seconds
Real time usage: 0.114 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 534/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 15818/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3575/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 7/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 0/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.031/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1448977/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%   89.358      1 -total
 70.93%   63.380      1 Template:Header
 15.93%   14.232      1 Template:PD-USGov
 13.09%   11.695      1 Template:License
  7.91%    7.064      1 Template:CaseCaption
  7.23%    6.458      1 Template:Header/main_block
  5.39%    4.815      1 Template:License_scope
  3.89%    3.475      2 Template:Uc
  2.99%    2.670      1 Template:USSCcase
  2.37%    2.120      1 Template:License_grammar
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:915166-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211905 and revision id 3003930.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Miller_v._United_States_(357_U.S._301)&oldid=3003930"
Categories: United States Supreme Court decisionsUnited States Supreme Court decisions in Volume 357PD-USGovHidden categories: Case missing lower courtCase missing case numberUncategorized United States Supreme Court decision
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other projects
Wikipedia
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 26 June 2011, at 07:36.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Magowan v. New York Belting Packing Company - Wikisource, the free online library
Magowan v. New York Belting Packing Company - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Magowan v. New York Belting Packing Company
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Magowan v. New York Belting Packing Company by Samuel BlatchfordSyllabusrelated portals: Supreme Court of the United States.sister projects: Wikidata item.
809537Magowan v. New York Belting Packing Company — SyllabusSamuel Blatchford
Court Documents
Opinion of the Court
United States Supreme Court141 U.S. 332Magowan  v.  New York Belting Packing Company
F. C. Lowthorp, Jr., for appellants.
B. F. Lee and W. H. Lee, for appellee.
Mr. Justice BLATCHFORD delivered the opinion of the court. 
Notes[edit]
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work of the United States federal government (see 17 U.S.C. 105).
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1323
Cached time: 20221017211905
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.081 seconds
Real time usage: 0.117 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 472/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 13923/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3364/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 7/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 0/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.032/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1463429/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%   90.832      1 -total
 68.78%   62.470      1 Template:Header
 18.48%   16.785      1 Template:PD-USGov
 16.72%   15.185      1 Template:License
  6.96%    6.326      1 Template:Header/main_block
  6.87%    6.237      1 Template:CaseCaption
  6.04%    5.485      1 Template:License_grammar
  5.57%    5.061      1 Template:License_scope
  3.67%    3.332      1 Template:USSCcase
  3.27%    2.966      2 Template:Uc
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:809537-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211905 and revision id 2972484.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Magowan_v._New_York_Belting_Packing_Company&oldid=2972484"
Categories: United States Supreme Court decisionsUnited States Supreme Court decisions in Volume 141PD-USGovHidden categories: Case missing lower courtCase missing argument dateCase missing decision dateCase missing case numberUncategorized United States Supreme Court decision
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 19 June 2011, at 19:44.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Executive Order 12265 - Wikisource, the free online library
Executive Order 12265 - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Executive Order 12265
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Executive Order 12265by President of the United StatesProviding for Enhancement and Coordination of Federal Consumer Programs
◄  Executive Order 12264
592023
Executive Order 12266  ►
Signed by President Jimmy Carter Thursday, January 15, 1981
Federal Register page & date: 46 FR 4665, Monday, January 19, 1981
See the Notes section for a list of Executive Orders affected by or related to the issuance of this Executive Order. more info.
By the authority vested in me as President by the Constitution of the United States of America, and in order to enlarge the membership of the Consumer Affairs Council from twelve to twenty-four, Section 1 - 102 of Executive Order No. 12160 of September 26, 1979, is hereby amended to read as follows:
"1 - 102. The Council shall consist of representatives of the following agencies and such other officers or employees of the United States as the President may designate as members:
(a) Department of Agriculture.
(b) Department of Commerce.
(c) Department of Defense.
(d) Department of Energy.
(e) Department of Health and Human Services.
(f) Department of Housing and Urban Development.
(g) Department of the Interior.
(h) Department of Justice.
(i) Department of Labor.
(j) Department of State.
(k) Department of Transportation.
(l) Department of the Treasury.
(m) ACTION Agency.
(n) Administrative Conference of the United States.
(o) Community Services Administration.
(p) Department of Education
(q) Environmental Protection Agency.
(r) Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
(s) Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(t) General Services Administration.
(u) Small Business Administration.
(v) Tennessee Valley Authority.
(w) Veterans Administration.
(x) Commission on Civil Rights is invited to participate.
Each agency on the Council shall be represented by the head of the agency or by a senior-level official designated by the head of the agency.".
Jimmy Carter⁠
The White House,
January 15, 1981.
Notes[edit]
Amends:
Executive Order No. 12160, September 26, 1979
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work of the United States federal government (see 17 U.S.C. 105).
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1321
Cached time: 20221017081541
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.060 seconds
Real time usage: 0.085 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 924/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 12229/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2355/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 10/100
Expensive parser function count: 0/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 0/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.008/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 853965/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%   62.913      1 -total
 55.55%   34.946      1 Template:Potus-eo
 27.12%   17.065      3 Template:Str_number/trim
 26.96%   16.962      1 Template:PD-USGov
 24.23%   15.245      1 Template:License
 14.48%    9.112      4 Template:Potus-eo/data
 13.72%    8.630      1 Template:License_scope
 10.52%    6.619      1 Template:TextQuality
  6.32%    3.975      1 Template:USFR
  3.86%    2.429      2 Template:Sc
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:592023-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017081541 and revision id 1764920.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Executive_Order_12265&oldid=1764920"
Categories: 75%Executive orders of 1981Executive orders of Jimmy CarterPD-USGov-POTUSPD-USGov
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 3 February 2010, at 06:40.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Dainese v. Cooke - Wikisource, the free online library
Dainese v. Cooke - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Dainese v. Cooke
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Dainese v. Cooke by Samuel Freeman MillerSyllabusrelated portals: Supreme Court of the United States.sister projects: Wikidata item.
728683Dainese v. Cooke — SyllabusSamuel Freeman Miller
Court Documents
Opinion of the Court
United States Supreme Court91 U.S. 580Dainese  v.  Cooke
APPEAL from the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia.
Mr. F. P. Cuppy and Mr. John W. Ross for the appellant, and Mr. Edwin L. Stanton for the appellees.
MR. JUSTICE MILLER delivered the opinion of the court. 
Notes[edit]
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work of the United States federal government (see 17 U.S.C. 105).
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1369
Cached time: 20221017211906
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.063 seconds
Real time usage: 0.097 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 468/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 13542/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3260/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 7/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 0/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.024/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1461907/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%   76.422      1 -total
 73.00%   55.790      1 Template:Header
 15.07%   11.520      1 Template:PD-USGov
 13.24%   10.119      1 Template:License
  8.10%    6.189      1 Template:Header/main_block
  6.65%    5.085      1 Template:CaseCaption
  5.75%    4.391      1 Template:License_scope
  3.52%    2.692      2 Template:Uc
  3.18%    2.432      1 Template:USSCcase
  2.42%    1.850      1 Template:License_grammar
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:728683-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211906 and revision id 2984310.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Dainese_v._Cooke&oldid=2984310"
Categories: United States Supreme Court decisionsUnited States Supreme Court decisions in Volume 91PD-USGovHidden categories: Case missing lower courtCase missing argument dateCase missing decision dateCase missing case numberUncategorized United States Supreme Court decision
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 22 June 2011, at 12:27.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Montgomery v. United States (162 U.S. 410) - Wikisource, the free online library
Montgomery v. United States (162 U.S. 410) - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Montgomery v. United States (162 U.S. 410)
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Montgomery v. United States (162 U.S. 410) by George Shiras, Jr.Syllabusrelated portals: Supreme Court of the United States.sister projects: Wikidata item.
823130Montgomery v. United States (162 U.S. 410) — SyllabusGeorge Shiras, Jr.
Court Documents
Opinion of the Court
United States Supreme Court162 U.S. 410Montgomery  v.  United States
Creed F. Bates, for plaintiff in error.
Asst. Atty. Gen. Whitney, for the United States.
Mr. Justice SHIRAS delivered the opinion of the court. 
Notes[edit]
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work of the United States federal government (see 17 U.S.C. 105).
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1321
Cached time: 20221017211906
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.066 seconds
Real time usage: 0.099 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 472/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 13871/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3314/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 7/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 0/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.025/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1466972/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%   78.409      1 -total
 73.62%   57.726      1 Template:Header
 14.79%   11.594      1 Template:PD-USGov
 12.69%    9.952      1 Template:License
  8.23%    6.454      1 Template:Header/main_block
  6.00%    4.706      1 Template:CaseCaption
  5.45%    4.274      1 Template:License_scope
  3.06%    2.401      1 Template:USSCcase
  2.90%    2.277      2 Template:Uc
  2.38%    1.866      1 Template:License_grammar
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:823130-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211906 and revision id 2973740.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Montgomery_v._United_States_(162_U.S._410)&oldid=2973740"
Categories: United States Supreme Court decisionsUnited States Supreme Court decisions in Volume 162PD-USGovHidden categories: Case missing lower courtCase missing argument dateCase missing decision dateCase missing case numberUncategorized United States Supreme Court decision
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 20 June 2011, at 09:01.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Eckbert the Blond - Wikisource, the free online library
Eckbert the Blond - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Eckbert the Blond
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
A scan-backed, verifiable version of this work can be edited at Index:Tales by Musæus, Tieck, Richter, Volume 1.djvu.
If you would like to help, please see Help:Match and split and Help:Proofread.
Eckbert the Blond  (1797)  by Ludwig Tieck, translated by Thomas Carlylesister projects: Wikipedia article, Wikidata item.
Eckbert the Blond (Der blonde Eckbert) was written in 1796 and published the following year in Volksmärchen von Peter Lebrecht. It was republished in 1812 in Tieck's collection of tales Phantasus (Part I).
Ludwig Tieck663577Eckbert the Blond1797Thomas Carlyle
The Fair-Haired Eckbert
In a district of the Harz dwelt a Knight, whose common designation in that quarter was the Fair-haired Eckbert. He was about forty years of age, scarcely of middle stature, and short light-coloured locks lay close and sleek round his pale and sunken countenance. He led a retired life, had never interfered in the feuds of his neighbours; indeed, beyond the outer wall of his castle he was seldom to be seen. His wife loved solitude as much as he; both seemed heartily attached to one another; only now and then they would lament that Heaven had not blessed their marriage with children.
Few came to visit Eckbert; and when guests did happen to be with him, their presence made but little alteration in his customary way of life. Temperance abode in his household, and Frugality herself appeared to be the mistress of the entertainment. On these occasions Eckbert was always cheerful and lively; but when he was alone, you might observe in him a certain mild reserve, a still, retiring melancholy.
His most frequent guest was Philip Walther; a man to whom he had attached himself, from having found in him a way of thinking like his own. Walther's residence was in Franconia; but he would often stay for half a year in Eckbert's neighbourhood, gathering plants and minerals, and then sorting and arranging them. He lived on a small independency, and was connected with no one. Eckbert frequently attended him in his sequestered walks; year after year a closer friendship grew betwixt them.
There are hours in which a man feels grieved that he should have a secret from his friend, which, till then, he may have kept with niggard anxiety; some irresistible desire lays hold of our heart to open itself wholly, to disclose its inmost recesses to our friend, that so he may become our friend still more. It is in such moments that tender souls unveil themselves, and stand face to face; and at times it will happen, that the one recoils affrighted from the countenance of the other.
It was late in Autumn, when Eckbert, one cloudy evening, was sitting, with his friend and his wife Bertha, by the parlour fire. The flame cast a red glimmer through the room, and sported on the ceiling; the night looked sullenly in through the windows, and the trees without rustled in wet coldness. Walther complained of the long road he had to travel; and Eckbert proposed to him to stay where he was, to while away half of the night in friendly talk, and then to take a bed in the house till morning. Walther agreed, and the whole was speedily arranged: by and by wine and supper were brought in; fresh wood was laid upon the fire; the talk grew livelier and more confidential.
The cloth being removed, and the servants gone, Eckbert took his friend's hand, and said to him:
— Now you must let my wife tell you the history of her youth; it is curious enough, and you should know it.
— With all my heart, said Walther; and the party again drew round the hearth.
It was now midnight; the moon looked fitfully through the breaks of the driving clouds.
— You must not reckon me a babbler, began the lady. My husband says you have so generous a mind, that it is not right in us to hide aught from you. Only do not take my narrative for a fable, however strangely it may sound.
— I was born in a little village; my father was a poor herdsman. Our circumstances were not of the best; often we knew not where to find our daily bread. But what grieved me far more than this, were the quarrels which my father and mother often had about their poverty, and the bitter reproaches they cast on one another. Of myself too, I heard nothing said but ill; they were forever telling me that I was a silly stupid child, that I could not do the simplest turn of work; and in truth I was extremely inexpert and helpless; I let things fall; I neither learned to sew nor spin; I could be of no use to my parents; only their straits I understood too well. Often I would sit in a corner, and fill my little heart with dreams, how I would help them, if I should all at once grow rich; how I would overflow them with silver and gold, and feast myself on their amazement; and then spirits came hovering up, and showed me buried treasures, or gave me little pebbles which changed into precious stones; in short, the strangest fancies occupied me, and when I had to rise and help with anything, my inexpertness was still greater, as my head was giddy with these motley visions.
— My father in particular was always very cross to me; he scolded me for being such a burden to the house; indeed he often used me rather cruelly, and it was very seldom that I got a friendly word from him. In this way I had struggled on to near the end of my eighth year; and now it was seriously fixed that I should begin to do or learn something. My father still maintained that it was nothing but caprice in me, or a lazy wish to pass my days in idleness: accordingly he set upon me with furious threats; and as these made no improvement, he one day gave me a most cruel chastisement, and added that the same should be repeated day after day, since I was nothing but a useless sluggard.
— That whole night I wept abundantly; I felt myself so utterly forsaken, I had such a sympathy with myself that I even longed to die. I dreaded the break of day; I knew not on earth what I was to do or try. I wished from my very heart to be clever, and could not understand how I should be worse than the other children of the place. I was on the borders of despair.
— At the dawn of day I arose, and scarcely knowing what I did, unfastened the door of our little hut. I stept upon the open field; next minute I was in a wood, where the light of the morning had yet hardly penetrated. I ran along, not looking round; for I felt no fatigue, and I still thought my father would catch me, and in his anger at my flight would beat me worse than ever.
— I had reached the other side of the forest, and the sun was risen a considerable way; I saw something dim lying before me, and a thick fog resting over it. Ere long my path began to mount, at one time I was climbing hills, at another winding among rocks; and I now guessed that I must be among the neighbouring Mountains; a thought that made me shudder in my loneliness. For, living in the plain country, I had never seen a hill; and the very word Mountains, when I heard talk of them, had been a sound of terror to my young ear. I had not the heart to go back, my fear itself drove me on; often I looked round affrighted when the breezes rustled over me among the trees, or the stroke of some distant woodman sounded far through the still morning. And when I began to meet with charcoal-men and miners, and heard the foreign way of speech, I had nearly fainted for terror.
— I passed through several villages; begging now and then, for I felt hungry and thirsty; and fashioning my answers as I best could when questions were put to me. In this manner I had wandered on some four days, when I came upon a little footpath, which led me farther and farther from the highway. The rocks about me now assumed a different and far stranger form. They were cliffs so piled on one another, that it looked as if the first gust of wind would hurl them all this way and that. I knew not whether to go on or stop. Till now I had slept by night in the woods, for it was the finest season of the year, or in some remote shepherd's hut; but here I saw no human dwelling at all, and could not hope to find one in the wilderness; the crags grew more and more frightful; I had many a time to glide along by the very edge of dreadful abysses; by degrees my footpath became fainter, and at last all traces of it vanished from beneath me. I was utterly comfortless; I wept and screamed; and my voice came echoing back from the rocky valleys with a sound that terrified me. The night now came on, and I sought out a mossy nook to lie down in. I could not sleep; in the darkness I heard the strangest noises; sometimes I took them to proceed from wild beasts, sometimes from wind moaning through the rocks, sometimes from unknown birds. I prayed; and did not sleep till towards morning.
— When the light came upon my face, I awoke. Before me was a steep rock; I clomb up, in the hope of discovering some outlet from the waste, perhaps of seeing houses or men. But when I reached the top, there was nothing still, so far as my eye could reach, but a wilderness of crags and precipices, all was covered with a dim haze; the day was gray and troubled, and no tree, no meadow, not even a bush could I find, only a few shrubs shooting up stunted and solitary in the narrow clefts of the rocks. I cannot utter what a longing I felt but to see one human creature, any living mortal, even though I had been afraid of hurt from him. At the same time I was tortured by a gnawing hunger; I sat down, and made up my mind to die. After a while, however, the desire of living gained the mastery; I roused myself, and wandered forward amid tears and broken sobs all day; in the end, I hardly knew what I was doing; I was tired and spent; I scarcely wished to live, and yet I feared to die.
— Towards night the country seemed to grow a little kindlier; my thoughts, my desires revived, the wish for life awoke in all my veins. I thought I heard the rushing of a mill afar off; I redoubled my steps; and how glad, how light of heart was I, when at last I actually gained the limits of the barren rocks, and saw woods and meadows lying before me, with soft green hills in the distance! I felt as if I had stept out of hell into a paradise; my loneliness and helplessness no longer frightened me.
— Instead of the hoped-for mill, I came upon a waterfall, which, in truth, considerably damped my joy. I was lifting a drink from it in the hollow of my hand, when all at once I thought I heard a slight cough some little way from me. Never in my life was I so joyfully surprised as at this moment: I went near, and at the border of the wood I saw an old woman sitting resting on the ground. She was dressed almost wholly in black; a black hood covered her head, and the greater part of her face; in her hand she held a crutch.
— I came up to her, and begged for help; she made me sit by her, and gave me bread, and a little wine. While I ate, she sang in a screeching tone some kind of spiritual song. When she had done, she told me I might follow her.
— The offer charmed me, strange as the old woman's voice and look appeared. With her crutch she limped away pretty fast, and at every step she twisted her face so oddly, that at first I was like to laugh. The wild rocks retired behind us more and more: I never shall forget the aspect and the feeling of that evening. All things were as molten into the softest golden red; the trees were standing with their tops in the glow of the sunset; on the fields lay a mild brightness; the woods and the leaves of the trees were standing motionless; the pure sky looked out like an open paradise, and the gushing of the brooks, and, from time to time, the rustling of the trees, resounded through the serene stillness, as in pensive joy. My young soul was here first taken with a forethought of the world and its vicissitudes. I forgot myself and my conductress; my spirit and my eyes were wandering among the shining clouds.
— We now mounted an eminence planted with birch-trees; from the top we looked into a green valley, likewise full of birches; and down below, in the middle of them, was a little hut. A glad barking reached us, and immediately a little nimble dog came springing round the old woman, fawned on her, and wagged its tail; it next came to me, viewed me on all sides, and then turned back with a friendly look to its old mistress.
— On reaching the bottom of the hill, I heard the strangest song, as if coming from the hut, and sung by some bird. It ran thus:
Alone in wood so gay
'Tis good to stay,
Morrow like today,
Forever and aye:
O, I do love to stay
Alone in wood so gay.
— These few words were continually repeated, and to describe the sound, it was as if you heard forest-horns and shalms sounded together from a far distance.
— My curiosity was wonderfully on the stretch; without waiting for the old woman's orders, I stept into the hut. It was already dusk; here all was neatly swept and trimmed; some bowls were standing in a cupboard, some strange-looking casks or pots on a table; in a glittering cage, hanging by the window, was a bird, and this in fact proved to be the singer. The old woman coughed and panted: it seemed as if she never would get over her fatigue: she patted the little dog, she talked with the bird, which only answered her with its accustomed song; and for me, she did not seem to recollect that I was there at all. Looking at her so, many qualms and fears came over me; for her face was in perpetual motion; and, besides, her head shook from old age, so that, for my life, I could not understand what sort of countenance she had.
— Having gathered strength again, she lit a candle, covered a very small table, and brought out supper. She now looked round for me, and bade me take a little cane-chair. I was thus sitting close fronting her, with the light between us. She folded her bony hands, and prayed aloud, still twisting her countenance, so that I was once more on the point of laughing; but I took strict care that I might not make her angry.
— After supper she again prayed, then showed me a bed in a low narrow closet; she herself slept in the room. I did not watch long, for I was half stupefied; but in the night I now and then awoke, and heard the old woman coughing, and between whiles talking with her dog and her bird, which last seemed dreaming, and replied with only one or two words of its rhyme. This, with the birches rustling before the window, and the song of a distant nightingale, made such a wondrous combination, that I never fairly thought I was awake, but only falling out of one dream into another still stranger.
— The old woman awoke me in the morning, and soon after gave me work. I was put to spin, which I now learned very easily; I had likewise to take charge of the dog and the bird. I soon learned my business in the house: I now felt as if it all must be so; I never once remembered that the old woman had so many singularities, that her dwelling was mysterious, and lay apart from all men, and that the bird must be a very strange creature. Its beauty, indeed, always struck me, for its feathers glittered with all possible colours; the fairest deep blue, and the most burning red, alternated about his neck and body; and when singing, he blew himself proudly out, so that his feathers looked still finer.
— My old mistress often went abroad, and did not come again till night; on these occasions I went out to meet her with the dog, and she used to call me child and daughter. In the end I grew to like her heartily; as our mind, especially in childhood, will become accustomed and attached to anything. In the evenings she taught me to read; and this was afterwards a source of boundless satisfaction to me in my solitude, for she had several ancient-written books, that contained the strangest stories.
— The recollection of the life I then led is still singular to me: Visited by no human creature, secluded in the circle of so small a family; for the dog and the bird made the same impression on me which in other cases long-known friends produce. I am surprised that I have never since been able to recall the dog's name, a very odd one, often as I then pronounced it.
— Four years I had passed in this way (I must now have been nearly twelve), when my old dame began to put more trust in me, and at length told me a secret. The bird, I found, laid every day an egg, in which there was a pearl or a jewel. I had already noticed that she often went to fettle privately about the cage, but I had never troubled myself farther on the subject. She now gave me charge of gathering these eggs in her absence, and carefully storing them up in the strange-looking pots. She would leave me food, and sometimes stay away longer, for weeks, for months. My little wheel kept humming round, the dog barked, the bird sang; and withal there was such a stillness in the neighbourhood, that I do not recollect of any storm or foul weather all the time I stayed there. No one wandered thither; no wild-beast came near our dwelling: I was satisfied, and worked along in peace from day to day. One would perhaps be very happy, could he pass his life so undisturbedly to the end.
— From the little that I read, I formed quite marvellous notions of the world and its people; all taken from myself and my society. When I read of witty persons, I could not figure them but like the little shock; great ladies, I conceived, were like the bird; all old women like my mistress. I had read somewhat of love, too; and often, in fancy, I would sport strange stories with myself. I figured out the fairest knight on Earth; adorned him with all perfections, without knowing rightly, after all my labour, how he looked: but I could feel a hearty pity for myself when he ceased to love me; I would then, in thought, make long melting speeches, or perhaps aloud, to try if I could win him back. You smile! These young days are, in truth, far away from us all.
— I now liked better to be left alone, for I was then sole mistress of the house. The dog loved me, and did all I wanted; the bird replied to all my questions with his rhyme; my wheel kept briskly turning, and at bottom I had never any wish for change. When my dame returned from her long wanderings, she would praise my diligence; she said her house, since I belonged to it, was managed far more perfectly; she took a pleasure in my growth and healthy looks; in short, she treated me in all points like her daughter.
— Thou art a good girl, child, said she once to me, in her creaking tone; if thou continuest so, it will be well with thee: but none ever prospers when he leaves the straight path; punishment will overtake him, though it may be late. I gave little heed to this remark of hers at the time, for in all my temper and movements I was very lively; but by night it occurred to me again, and I could not understand what she meant by it. I considered all the words attentively; I had read of riches, and at last it struck me that her pearls and jewels might perhaps be something precious. Ere long this thought grew clearer to me. But the straight path, and leaving it? What could she mean by this?
— I was now fourteen; it is the misery of man that he arrives at understanding through the loss of innocence. I now saw well enough that it lay with me to take the jewels and the bird in the old woman's absence, and go forth with them and see the world which I had read of. Perhaps, too, it would then be possible that I might meet that fairest of all knights, who forever dwelt in my memory.
— At first this thought was nothing more than any other thought; but when I used to be sitting at my wheel, it still returned to me, against my will; and I sometimes followed it so far, that I already saw myself adorned in splendid attire, with princes and knights around me. On awakening from these dreams, I would feel a sadness when I looked up, and found myself still in the little cottage. For the rest, if I went through my duties, the old woman troubled herself little about what I thought or felt.
— One day she went out again, telling me that she should be away on this occasion longer than usual; that I must take strict charge of everything, and not let the time hang heavy on my hands. I had a sort of fear on taking leave of her, for I felt as if I should not see her any more. I looked long after her, and knew not why I felt so sad; it was almost as if my purpose had already stood before me, without myself being conscious of it.
— Never did I tend the dog and the bird with such diligence as now; they were nearer to my heart than formerly. The old woman had been gone some days, when I rose one morning in the firm mind to leave the cottage, and set out with the bird to see this world they talked so much of. I felt pressed and hampered in my heart; I wished to stay where I was, and yet the thought of that afflicted me; there was a strange contention in my soul, as if between two discordant spirits. One moment my peaceful solitude would seem to me so beautiful; the next the image of a new world, with its many wonders, would again enchant me.
— I knew not what to make of it; the dog leaped up continually about me; the sunshine spread abroad over the fields; the green birch-trees glittered; I always felt as if I had something I must do in haste; so I caught the little dog, tied him up in the room, and took the cage with the bird under my arm. The dog writhed and whined at this unusual treatment; he looked at me with begging eyes, but I feared to have him with me. I also took one pot of jewels, and concealed it by me; the rest I left.
— The bird turned its head very strangely when I crossed the threshold; the dog tugged at his cord to follow me, but he was forced to stay.
— I did not take the road to the wild rocks, but went in the opposite direction. The dog still whined and barked, and it touched me to the heart to hear him; the bird tried once or twice to sing; but as I was carrying him, the shaking put him out.
— The farther I went, the fainter grew the barking, and at last it altogether ceased. I wept, and had almost turned back, but the longing to see something new still hindered me.
— I had got across the hills, and through some forests, when the night came on, and I was forced to turn aside into a village. I blushed exceedingly on entering the inn; they showed me to a room and bed; I slept pretty quietly, only that I dreamed of the old woman, and her threatening me.
— My journey had not much variety; the farther I went, the more was I afflicted by the recollection of my old mistress and the little dog; I considered that in all likelihood the poor shock would die of hunger, and often in the woods I thought my dame would suddenly meet me. Thus amid tears and sobs I went along; when I stopped to rest, and put the cage on the ground, the bird struck up his song, and brought but too keenly to my mind the fair habitation I had left. As human nature is forgetful, I imagined that my former journey, in my childhood, had not been so sad and woful as the present; I wished to be as I was then.
— I had sold some jewels; and now, after wandering on for several days, I reached a village. At the very entrance I was struck with something strange; I felt terrified and knew not why; but I soon bethought myself, for it was the village where I was born! How amazed was I! How the tears ran down my cheeks for gladness, for a thousand singular remembrances! Many things were changed: new houses had been built, some just raised when I went away, were now fallen, and had marks of fire on them; everything was far smaller and more confined than I had fancied. It rejoiced my very heart that I should see my parents once more after such an absence. I found their little cottage, the well-known threshold; the door-latch was standing as of old; it seemed to me as if I had shut it only yesternight. My heart beat violently, I hastily lifted that latch; but faces I had never seen before looked up and gazed at me. I asked for the shepherd Martin; they told me that his wife and he were dead three years ago. I drew back quickly, and left the village weeping aloud.
— I had figured out so beautifully how I would surprise them with my riches: by the strangest chance, what I had only dreamed in childhood was become reality; and now it was all in vain, they could not rejoice with me, and that which had been my first hope in life was lost forever.
— In a pleasant town I hired a small house and garden, and took to myself a maid. The world, in truth, proved not so wonderful as I had painted it: but I forgot the old woman and my former way of life rather more, and, on the whole, I was contented.
— For a long while the bird had ceased to sing; I was therefore not a little frightened, when one night he suddenly began again, and with a different rhyme. He sang:
Alone in wood so gay,
Ah, far away!
But thou wilt say
Some other day
'Twere best to stay
Alone in wood so gay.
— Throughout the night I could not close an eye; all things again occurred to my remembrance; and I felt, more than ever, that I had not acted rightly. When I rose, the aspect of the bird distressed me greatly; he looked at me continually, and his presence did me ill. There was now no end to his song; he sang it louder and more shrilly than he had been wont. The more I looked at him, the more he pained and frightened me; at last I opened the cage, put in my hand, and grasped his neck; I squeezed my ringers hard together, he looked at me, I slackened them; but he was dead. I buried him in the garden.
— After this, there often came a fear over me for my maid; I looked back upon myself, and fancied she might rob me or murder me. For a long while I had been acquainted with a young knight, whom I altogether liked: I bestowed on him my hand; and with this, Sir Walther, ends my story.
— Ay, you should have see her then, said Eckbert warmly; seen her youth, her loveliness, and what a charm her lonely way of life had given her. I had no fortune; it was through her love these riches came to me; we moved hither, and our marriage has at no time brought us anything but good.
— But with our tattling, added Bertha, it is growing very late; we must go to sleep.
She rose, and proceeded to her chamber; Walther, with a kiss of her hand, wished her good-night, saying:
— Many thanks, noble lady; I can well figure you beside your singing bird, and how you fed poor little Strohmian.
Walther likewise went to sleep; Eckbert alone still walked in a restless humour up and down the room.
— Are not men fools? said he at last: I myself occasioned this recital of my wife's history, and now such confidence appears to me improper! Will he not abuse it? Will he not communicate the secret to others? Will he not, for such is human nature, cast unblessed thoughts on our jewels, and form pretexts and lay plans to get possession of them?
It now occurred to his mind that Walther had not taken leave of him so cordially as might have been expected after such a mark of trust: the soul once set upon suspicion finds in every trifle something to confirm it. Eckbert, on the other hand, reproached himself for such ignoble feelings to his worthy friend; yet still he could not cast them out. All night he plagued himself with such uneasy thoughts, and got very little sleep.
Bertha was unwell next day, and could not come to breakfast; Walther did not seem to trouble himself much about her illness, but left her husband also rather coolly. Eckbert could not comprehend such conduct; he went to see his wife, and found her in a feverish state; she said her last night's story must have agitated her.
From that day, Walther visited the castle of his friend but seldom; and when he did appear, it was but to say a few unmeaning words and then depart. Eckbert was exceedingly distressed by this demeanour: to Bertha or Walther he indeed said nothing of it; but to any person his internal disquietude was visible enough.
Bertha's sickness wore an aspect more and more serious; the Doctor grew alarmed; the red had vanished from his patient's cheeks, and her eyes were becoming more and more inflamed. One morning she sent for her husband to her bedside; the nurses were ordered to withdraw.
— Dear Eckbert, she began, I must disclose a secret to thee, which has almost taken away my senses, which is ruining my health, unimportant trifle as it may appear. Thou mayest remember, often as I talked of my childhood, I could never call to mind the name of the dog that was so long beside me: now, that night on taking leave, Walther all at once said to me: I can well figure you, and how you fed poor little Strohmian. Is it chance? Did he guess the name; did he know it, and speak it on purpose? If so, how stands this man connected with my destiny? At times I struggle with myself as if I but imagined this mysterious business; but, alas! it is certain, too certain. I felt a shudder that a stranger should help me to recall the memory of my secrets. What sayest thou, Eckbert?
Eckbert looked at his sick and agitated wife with deep emotion; he stood silent and thoughtful; then spoke some words of comfort to her, and went out. In a distant chamber, he walked to and fro in indescribable disquiet. Walther, for many years, had been his sole companion; and now this person was the only mortal in the world whose existence pained and oppressed him. It seemed as if he should be gay and light of heart, were that one thing but removed. He took his bow, to dissipate these thoughts; and went to hunt.
It was a rough stormy winter-day; the snow was lying deep on the hills, and bending down the branches of the trees. He roved about; the sweat was standing on his brow; he found no game, and this embittered his ill-humour. All at once he saw an object moving in the distance; it was Walther gathering moss from the trunks of trees. Scarce knowing what he did, he bent his bow; Walther looked round, and gave a threatening gesture, but the arrow was already flying, and he sank transfixed by it.
Eckbert felt relieved and calmed, yet a certain horror drove him home to his castle. It was a good way distant; he had wandered far into the woods. On arriving, he found Bertha dead: before her death, she had spoken much of Walther and the old woman.
For a great while after this occurrence, Eckbert lived in the deepest solitude: he had all along being melancholy, for the strange history of his wife disturbed him, and he dreaded some unlucky incident or other; but at present he was utterly at variance with himself. The murder of his friend arose incessantly before his mind; he lived in the anguish of continual remorse.
To dissipate his feelings, he occasionally moved to the neighbouring town, where he mingled in society and its amusements. He longed for a friend to fill the void in his soul; and yet, when he remembered Walther, he would shudder at the thought of meeting with a friend; for he felt convinced that, with any friend, he must be unhappy. He had lived so long with his Bertha in lovely calmness; the friendship of Walther had cheered him through so many years; and now both of them were suddenly swept away. As he thought of these things, there were many moments when his life appeared to him some fabulous tale, rather than the actual history of a living man. A young knight, named Hugo, made advances to the silent melancholy Eckbert, and appeared to have a true affection for him. Eckbert felt himself exceedingly surprised; he met the knight's friendship with the greater readiness, the less he had anticipated it. The two were now frequently together; Hugo showed his friend all possible attentions; one scarcely ever went to ride without the other; in all companies they got together. In a word, they seemed inseparable.
Eckbert was never happy longer than a few transitory moments: for he felt too clearly that Hugo loved him only by mistake; that he knew him not, was unacquainted with his history; and he was seized again with the same old longing to unbosom himself wholly, that he might be sure whether Hugo was his friend or not. But again his apprehensions, and the fear of being hated and abhorred, withheld him. There were many hours in which he felt so much impressed with his entire worthlessness, that he believed no mortal not a stranger to his history, could entertain regard for him. Yet still he was unable to withstand himself: on a solitary ride, he disclosed his whole history to Hugo, and asked if he could love a murderer. Hugo seemed touched, and tried to comfort him. Eckbert returned to town with a lighter heart.
But it seemed to be his doom that, in the very hour of confidence, he should always find materials for suspicion. Scarcely had they entered the public hall, when, in the glitter of the many lights, Hugo's looks had ceased to satisfy him. He thought he noticed a malicious smile; he remarked that Hugo did not speak to him as usual; that he talked with the rest, and seemed to pay no heed to him. In the party was an old knight, who had always shown himself the enemy of Eckbert, had often asked about his riches and his wife in a peculiar style. With this man Hugo was conversing; they were speaking privately, and casting looks at Eckbert. The suspicions of the latter seemed confirmed; he thought himself betrayed, and a tremendous rage took hold of him. As he continued gazing, on a sudden he discerned the countenance of Walther, all his features, all the form so well known to him; he gazed, and looked, and felt convinced that it was none but Walther who was talking to the knight. His horror cannot be described; in a state of frenzy he rushed out of the hall, left the town overnight, and after many wanderings, returned to his castle.
Here, like an unquiet spirit, he hurried to and fro from room to room; no thought would stay with him; out of one frightful idea he fell into another still more frightful, and sleep never visited his eyes. Often he believed that he was mad, that a disturbed imagination was the origin of all this terror; then, again, he recollected Walther's features, and the whole grew more and more a riddle to him. He resolved to take a journey, that he might reduce his thoughts to order; the hope of friendship, the desire of social intercourse, he had now forever given up.
He set out, without prescribing to himself any certain route; indeed, he took small heed of the country he was passing through. Having hastened on some days at the quickest pace of his horse, he, on a sudden, found himself entangled in a labyrinth of rocks, from which he could discover no outlet. At length he met an old peasant, who took him by a path leading past a waterfall: he offered him some coins for his guidance, but the peasant would not have them.
— What use is it? said Eckbert. I could believe that this man, too, was none but Walther.
He looked round once more, and it was none but Walther. Eckbert spurred his horse as fast as it could gallop, over meads and forests, till it sank exhausted to the earth. Regardless of this, he hastened forward on foot. In a dreamy mood he mounted a hill: he fancied he caught the sound of lively barking at a little distance; the birch-trees whispered in the intervals, and in the strangest notes he heard this song:
Alone in wood so gay,
Once more I stay;
None dare me slay,
The evil far away:
Ah, here I stay,
Alone in wood so gay.
The sense, the consciousness of Eckbert had departed; it was a riddle which he could not solve, whether he was dreaming now, or had before dreamed of a wife and friend. The marvellous was mingled with the common: the world around him seemed enchanted, and he himself was incapable of thought or recollection.
A crooked, bent old woman, crawled coughing up the hill with a crutch.
— Art thou bringing me my bird, my pearls, my dog? cried she to him. See how injustice punishes itself! No one but I was Walther, was Hugo.
— God of Heaven! said Eckbert, muttering to himself; in what frightful solitude have I passed my life?
— And Bertha was thy sister.
Eckbert sank to the ground.
— Why did she leave me deceitfully? All would have been fair and well; her time of trial was already finished. She was the daughter of a knight, who had her nursed in a shepherd's house; the daughter of thy father.
— Why have I always had a forecast of this dreadful thought? cried Eckbert.
— Because in early youth thy father told thee: he could not keep this daughter by him for his second wife, her stepmother.
Eckbert lay distracted and dying on the ground. Faint and bewildered, he heard the old woman speaking, the dog barking, and the bird repeating its song.
The End
  This work is a translation and has a separate copyright status to the applicable copyright protections of the original content.
Original:
This work was published before January 1, 1927, and is in the public domain worldwide because the author died at least 100 years ago.
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
Translation:
This work was published before January 1, 1927, and is in the public domain worldwide because the author died at least 100 years ago.
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1420
Cached time: 20221017010041
Cache expiry: 86400
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.135 seconds
Real time usage: 0.197 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1313/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 42733/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11340/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 21465/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.057/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 2371129/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 2/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  164.569      1 -total
 36.57%   60.182      1 Template:Migrate_to
 31.83%   52.381      1 Template:Header
 25.28%   41.608      1 Template:Ambox
 11.17%   18.390      1 Template:Translation_license
 10.21%   16.799      1 Template:Category_handler
  7.55%   12.423      1 Template:License_container_begin
  6.85%   11.272      1 Template:Collapsible_box
  6.46%   10.637     55 Template:Unicode
  6.22%   10.236      2 Template:Center
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:663577-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017010041 and revision id 12218293.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Eckbert_the_Blond&oldid=12218293"
Categories: 1797 worksPD-oldWorks originally in GermanHidden category: Texts to be migrated to scans
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other projects
Wikipedia
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 14 March 2022, at 09:50.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Weekly List, National Register of Historic Places (January 9, 1984) - Wikisource, the free online library
Weekly List, National Register of Historic Places (January 9, 1984) - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Weekly List, National Register of Historic Places (January 9, 1984)
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
←January 3
Weekly List, National Register of Historic Places (January 9, 1984)  by the United States National Park ServiceJanuary 17→
related portals: United States National Park Service.sister projects: Wikidata item.
2546327Weekly List, National Register of Historic Places (January 9, 1984)1984by the United States National Park Service
​
IN REPLY REFER TO:
United States Department of the Interior
NATIONAL PARK SERVICEWASHINGTON, D.C.  20240
The Director of the National Park Service is pleased to inform you that the following properties have been entered in the National Register of Historic Places beginning January 1, 1984 and ending January 7, 1984. For further information call (202) 343-9552.
STATE, County, Vicinity, Property, Address, (Date Listed)
ALABAMA, Calhoun County, Piedmont, Southern Railway Depot, 200 N. Center Ave. (01/05/84)
ALABAMA, Mobile County, Mobile, Dahm House, 7 N. Claiborne St. (01/05/84)
ALABAMA, Mobile County, Mobile, Denby House, 558 Conti St. (01/05/84)
ALABAMA, Mobile County, Mobile, Meaher-Zoghby House, 5 N. Claiborne St. (01/05/84)
ALABAMA, Mobile County, Mobile, Metzger House, 7 N. Hamilton St. (01/05/84)
ALABAMA, Mobile County, Mobile, Monterey Place, 1552 Monterey Pl. (01/05/84)
ALABAMA, Mobile County, Mobile, Neville House, 255 St. Francis St. (01/05/84)
ALABAMA, Mobile County, Mobile, Phillippi House, 53 N. Jackson St. (01/05/84)
ALABAMA, Mobile County, Mobile, Scottish Rites Temple, 351 St. Francis St. (01/05/84)
ALABAMA, Mobile County, Mobile, St. Francis Street Methodist Church, 15 N. Joachim St. (01/05/84)
ALABAMA, Wilcox County, Camden, Liberty Hall, AL 221 (01/05/84)
CALIFORNIA, Fresno County, Fresno, Fresno Brewing Company Office and Warehouse, 100 M St. (01/05/84)
CALIFORNIA, Humboldt County, Arcata, Hotel Arcata, 708 9th St. (01/05/84)
CALIFORNIA, Marin County, Larkspur, Alexander-Acacia Bridge, Alexander Ave. between Acacia and Monte Vista Aves. (01/05/84)
CALIFORNIA, Orange County, Tustin, Stevens, Sherman, House, 228 W. Main St. (01/05/84)
CALIFORNIA, San Francisco County, San Francisco, Koshland House, 3800 Washington St. (01/05/84)
COLORADO, Arapahoe County, Aurora, Melvin School, 4950 S. Laredo St. (01/05/84)
COLORADO, Boulder County, Hygiene vic., Church of the Brethren, 17th Ave. (01/05/84)
COLORADO, Boulder County, Longmont, Empson Cannery, 15 3rd. Ave. (01/05/84)
COLORADO, Clear Creek County, Idaho Springs, Idaho Springs Downtown Commercial District, Roughly bounded by Center Alley, 14th Ave., Riverside Dr., and Idaho St. (01/05/84)
COLORADO, Denver County, Denver, Eppich Apartments, 1266 Emerson St. (01/05/84)
COLORADO, Denver County, Denver, Stonemen's Row Historic District, South side 28th Ave. between Umatilla and Vallejo Sts. (01/05/84)
COLORADO, Gunnison County, Gunnison, Fisher-Zugelder House and Smith Cottage, 601 N. Wisconsin St. (01/05/84)
COLORADO, Larimer County, Fort Collins, Fort Collins Municipal Railway Birnery Safety Streetcar No. 21, 1801 W. Mountain Ave. (01/05/84)
COLORADO, Mesa County, Grand Junction, North Seventh Street Historic Residential District, 7th St. between Hill and White Aves. (01/05/84)
CONNECTICUT, Fairfield County, Ridgefield, Weir, J. Alden, Farm (District), Nod Hill Rd. and Pelham Lane (01/05/84)
KENTUCKY, Christian County, Hopkinsville, Higgins, E.H., House (Christian County MRA), 1530 E. 7th St. (01/03/84)
 ​MONTANA, Lewis & Clark County, Marysville, Methodist-Episcopal Church of Marysville, 3rd St. (01/05/84)
NEW JERSEY, Essex County, Newark, Lincoln Park Historic District, Lincoln Park, Clinton Ave., and Spruce and Broad Sts. (01/05/84)
NEW MEXICO, Taos County, Los Cordovas, San Ysidro Oratorio, NM 240 (01/05/84)
NORTH CAROLINA, Forsyth County, Richmond Courthouse Site, (01/05/84)
PENNSYLVANIA, Lackawanna County, Scranton, Florence Apartments, 643 Adams Ave. (01/05/84)
PUERTO RICO, Mayaguez County, Guanica vicinity, Hacienda Santa Rita, PR 116 (01/05/84)
PUERTO RICO, Ponce County, Ponce, Cementerio Antiguo de Ponce, Torres #1 and Frontispicio St. (01/05/84)
TENNESSEE, Shelby County. Memphis, Lowenstein, Abraham, House, 217 N. Waldran Blvd. (01/05/84)
TEXAS, Bexar County, San Antonio, Alamo National Bank Building, 316 E. Commerce St. (01/05/84)
TEXAS, Palo Pinto County, Mineral Wells, Weatherford-Mineral Wells and Northwestern Railroad Depot, S. Oak St. (01/05/84)
TEXAS, Tarrant County, Fort Worth, Fort Worth Public Market, 1400 Henderson St. (01/05/84)
UTAH, Davis County, Centerville, Capener, William, House, 252 North 400 East (01/05/84)
WASHINGTON, King County, Seattle, Temple de Hirsch, 15th Ave. and E. Union St. (01/05/84)
WISCONSIN, Dane County, Madison, Brown, Charles E., Indian Mounds, University of Wisconsin Arboretum (01/05/84)
WISCONSIN, Marathon County, Wausau, Andrew Warren Historic District, Roughly bounded by Fulton, Grant, 4th, and 7th Sts. (01/05/84)
The following properties were also entered in the National Register but were excluded from a previous notice:
KENTUCKY, Jefferson County, Louisville, Limerick Historic District (Amended), Between Breckinridge and Oak, 5th and 8th St. (12/23/83)
Multiple Resource Areas are identified by MRA
Thematic Resources are identified by TR
NHL designates a National Historic Landmark 
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work of the United States federal government (see 17 U.S.C. 105).
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1366
Cached time: 20221017104816
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.114 seconds
Real time usage: 0.164 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 609/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 23393/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6144/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 0/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 9164/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.041/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1448749/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  145.285      1 -total
 52.83%   76.747      1 Template:Header
 24.60%   35.746      1 Page:Weekly_List_1984-01-09.pdf/1
 22.21%   32.272      1 Template:Rh
 20.50%   29.790      1 Template:RunningHeader/core
 10.01%   14.538      1 Template:Header/main_block
  8.44%   12.268      1 Template:PD-USGov
  7.48%   10.863      1 Template:License
  7.31%   10.617      1 Template:Img_float
  6.97%   10.120      1 Template:C
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:2546327-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017104816 and revision id 8079992.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Weekly_List,_National_Register_of_Historic_Places_(January_9,_1984)&oldid=8079992"
Categories: 1984 worksPD-USGovWeekly List, National Register of Historic PlacesHidden categories: Pages with override authorPages with noyear
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageSourceDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 26 August 2018, at 22:51.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Lessee of Brown v. Clements - Wikisource, the free online library
Lessee of Brown v. Clements - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Lessee of Brown v. Clements
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Lessee of Brown v. Clements by John McKinleySyllabusrelated portals: Supreme Court of the United States.sister projects: Wikidata item.
691371Lessee of Brown v. Clements — SyllabusJohn McKinley
Court Documents
Opinion of the Court
United States Supreme Court44 U.S. 650Lessee of Brown  v.  Clements
Notes[edit]
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work of the United States federal government (see 17 U.S.C. 105).
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1329
Cached time: 20221017211907
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.066 seconds
Real time usage: 0.099 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 472/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 13643/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3280/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 7/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 0/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.026/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1456055/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%   78.220      1 -total
 73.54%   57.521      1 Template:Header
 14.79%   11.566      1 Template:PD-USGov
 12.98%   10.150      1 Template:License
  8.12%    6.348      1 Template:Header/main_block
  6.25%    4.891      1 Template:CaseCaption
  5.74%    4.487      1 Template:License_scope
  3.25%    2.539      2 Template:Uc
  3.07%    2.402      1 Template:USSCcase
  2.37%    1.852      1 Template:License_grammar
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:691371-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211907 and revision id 2972051.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Lessee_of_Brown_v._Clements&oldid=2972051"
Categories: United States Supreme Court decisionsUnited States Supreme Court decisions in Volume 44PD-USGovHidden categories: Case missing lower courtCase missing argument dateCase missing decision dateCase missing case numberUncategorized United States Supreme Court decision
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 19 June 2011, at 18:30.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Statement on meeting the Republican House Caucus - Wikisource, the free online library
Statement on meeting the Republican House Caucus - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Statement on meeting the Republican House Caucus
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Statement on meeting the Republican House Caucus by Barack ObamaBarack Obama's official statementssister projects: Wikidata item.
Delivered from the Ohio Clock Corridor of the Capitol Building on 27 January 2009.
369368Statement on meeting the Republican House Caucus — Barack Obama's official statementsBarack Obama
Hello, everybody.  We had a very constructive meeting with the House members, members of the Republican Caucus.  I'm a little bit late for my Senate colleagues -- former Senate colleagues.
And the main message I have is that the statistics every day underscore the urgency of the economic situation.  The American people expect action.  They want us to put together a recovery package that puts people back to work, that creates investments that assure our long-term energy independence, an effective health care system, an education system that works; they want our infrastructure rebuilt, and they want it done wisely, so that we're not wasting taxpayer money.
As I explained to the Republican House Caucus, and I'll explain to my former Senate colleagues, the recovery package that we have proposed and is moving its way through Congress is just one leg in a multi-legged stool.  We're still going to have to have much better financial regulation, we've got to get credit flowing again, we're going to have to deal with the troubled assets that many banks are still carrying and that make the -- that have locked up the credit system.  We're going to have to coordinate with other countries, because we now have a global problem.
I am absolutely confident that we can deal with these issues, but the key right now is to make sure that we keep politics to a minimum.  There are some legitimate philosophical differences with parts of my plan that the Republicans have, and I respect that.  In some cases they may just not be as familiar with what's in the package as I would like.  I don't expect a hundred percent agreement from my Republican colleagues, but I do hope that we can all put politics aside and do the American people's business right now.
All right.
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work of the United States federal government (see 17 U.S.C. 105).
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1411
Cached time: 20221017165728
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.048 seconds
Real time usage: 0.072 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 230/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 10133/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2523/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 6/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 0/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.021/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1467071/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%   58.083      1 -total
 82.30%   47.802      1 Template:Header
 17.52%   10.179      1 Template:PD-USGov
 15.35%    8.916      1 Template:License
  9.01%    5.235      1 Template:Header/main_block
  6.44%    3.743      1 Template:License_scope
  3.09%    1.792      1 Template:License_grammar
  2.00%    1.162      1 Template:W
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:369368-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017165728 and revision id 3825376.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Statement_on_meeting_the_Republican_House_Caucus&oldid=3825376"
Category: PD-USGov
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 18 April 2012, at 08:23.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
he walked along in it. As the man jumped from his horse and looked down at him, he saw that it was not a soldier, but a peasant, and thinking this his last chance, he sprang out of the ditch, seizing the horse’s bridle with one hand, while he held out in the other what money and gold pieces he had in his pocket, crying out in German “give me ​your horse.” The man clutched the money, but resisted and would not give up his horse—two or three others riding up together, it was evident all struggle would be useless. The soldiers were now at hand, and he surrendered without further effort. They placed him between two rows of fixed bayonets; and with an ever increasing croud of spectators, marched back to the fortress.
It is now time to turn to the other parties in this adventure. General Lafayette, it will be remembered, had left his two deliverers on the ground and ridden off at their repeated request, not knowing exactly the direction, but hoping they would soon overtake him. He had not proceeded far before he came to a fork in the road, and took one he guessed to be in the direction of the frontiers. It proved to be the wrong one, in which he continued to ride rapidly for many miles; at length when his good horse was much jaded, he approached a village nearly thirty miles off, and he determined to procure, if possible, another horse, and addressed himself to an honest looking country-man in the outskirts of the village, stating that he was in want of a guide and a horse to take him on his hurried journey, and inquiring if the man would assist to procure them, without his ​entering the village. This the man undertook, and directed him to proceed along a lane at a little distance, promising to return to him at the end of it. The peasant then ran to the police, and gave information of the stranger, and his request for a horse. General Lafayette had not advanced far along the lane before he was met and surrounded by a party of soldiers, and immediately carried before a Magistrate. But he did not lose his presence of mind; he told a plausible story of his being in the country upon business, but had been detained and had lost his way; had ridden hard, as he was very anxious to reach his home on the frontiers before night, and told his story with such coolness and apparent accuracy, that the Magistrate seemed to hesitate, when a young man among the spectators in the Court-room called out, “I believe that is General Lafayette—I am almost sure I saw him when he was arrested at Neisse.” Then decided the Magistrate, on the bare possibility that such is the case, you must remain my prisoner till we hear from Olmutz. There being no farther hope, therefore, General Lafayette calmly acknowledged his identity, requesting some refreshment, and his evening cup of coffee, and was the next day taken back to his old quarters in Olmutz. This treatment he reports, was much the same as before.
 ​Dr. Bollman arrived alone at Hoff. After waiting as long as he could venture to delay, in hopes one of the others might arrive, towards night took the carriage, and the course the party had intended to pursue, crossed into Silesia, and lingered about the frontier, particularly near the mines of Tarrowitz, hoping General Lafayette might have escaped, and be concealed among them. But he was arrested at the Village of Waldenburg, and after some delay and correspondence with the government officers, he was handed over to the Austrians, and re-conducted to Olmutz, where he was put into a separate cell, but treated in all particulars in the same manner as Mr. Huger had already been, for nearly three weeks.
To resume the account of Mr. Huger’s arrest:
Wearied and almost exhausted, he was carried at once before a Magistrate in the Town Hall, a large room which was filled with officers, soldiers, and spectators; an interpreter was assigned him, who could speak both French and English, and translated his answers into German. This was Professor Passi, who always proved a good friend to him.
The room was presently cleared of spectators; the Military Commandant, Civil Magis​trate, and others forming his Court, and he was placed at the end of a long table, and questioned by the Magistrate; his answers translated by the interpreter were written down by a Secretary. Feeling that their enterprise had failed, and that others might be injured by his allowing them to be suspected, he thought it best to tell the whole and exact truth, narrated the facts from the first conception of the enterprise, explained that they had no accomplices—no assistants whatever, and that no parties were aware of the design of Dr. Bollman and himself, but General Lafayette. He was evidently not believed, and afterwards heard that all whom he had named in any way, had got into trouble on their account, and that the unsuspicious Medical Director of the prison had lost his place.
At the end of the examination a commitment was made out. He was searched, and his money, watch, knife, and even pencil taken from him. A file of soldiers received him, and took him again through the streets to the prison. Not going up the steps, but after passing through several rooms on the ground floor, stopped before one with double. doors and huge locks, which it seemed might be called the felon’s den. This was a large room ​with several occupants, all in chains, some fastened to the wall, others to a long bar, so that they could shuffle from one end of the room to the other. Each hada sort of long bench, as seat and bed, some straw on it, and a thick rug, as if to serve for mattrass and blanket; a pitcher of water, and a loaf of black bread placed near. He was ironed around one ankle and wrist, and the chains fastened high above his head, to a staple in the wall over his bed: Thus provided, he was left to find what repose he could. His companions appeared to be all low criminals, dirty and repulsive in appearance; he understood enough of the language to discover that their talk was of a similar character. They questioned him about himself, and enquired into the nature of the offense which brought him there; and on his explaining, as well as he could, they said, he thought, with increased respect for him: Oh! yours is a political crime; this is not the place for you; they will not keep you here long, which he was not sorry to hear, not then understanding that they thought he might soon be elevated to the scaffold. He felt terribly wearied and excited, and longed for quiet and sleep, but could only obtain snatches of rest, and hardly of forgetfulness, while the horrid forms and faces around him, with their ​German chattering and wrangling kept up through the whole night, seemed to him a hideous sort of nightmare. The only refreshment was frequent drafts of water from his pitcher; for, feverish and excited, he could find no rest. The next morning he met with alittle act from one of the convicts, which he mentioned, to prove that everywhere some touch of goodness and kindness may be found, even in a felon’s den.
The next morning a panel in the prison door was pushed open, and a man looked in and asked, who wants breakfast? All told their different wants, and gave little pieces of money for the purchase. The man then asked the new comer if he did not wish for something? Oh! yes, a cup of coffee or chocolate—something to drink he very much wished. You have money I suppose, said the man? Plenty in my trunk, but they have taken all I had about me, was the answer. That’s a pity! and the panel closed. The man presently returned with the various portions, and again asked Mr. Huger if he was sure he had no money at all to get coffee with, and being convinced, shut the panel, again, saying, that’s a pity, leaving the youth to his miserable prison fare. Presently a large, coarse-looking man in double irons ​shuffled up to him, holding out a roll of nice white bread, saying, here, young man, eat this, you are more used to such things than I am, so I give it to you, for I do not need it. He thanked the man and accepted the kindness, but on breaking off a piece, found his parched lips refused all solid food, so returned it to the donor, who seemed to understand him, and said, I know how you feel, but added as if in pity, you will soon get used to this sort of life.
Another day and night he spent in this wretched place. The following day they brought his new suit of prison clothes, which had been made for him, and took away his own. They were of coarse woolen cloth, of a peculiar red brick-dust color, (both conspicuous and well known). Then he was taken to a solitary cell, partly above ground, with no window; but a slit high up admitted a dim light. It had the same kind of long bench, with straw and rug, and he was chained in the same way, fastened to the wall, and left alone.
Then followed daily examinations before the Magistrate. At first he was led through the streets chained, and guarded by soldiers; but afterwards the Court was held in a different part of the prison buildings, and he was taken there by the jailor and one or two attendants, ​through a covered way. During these examinations the effort was to make him confess sTom Swift in Captivity - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Tom Swift in Captivity
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Tom Swift in Captivity  (1912)  by Victor Appleton
Book 13 in the Tom Swift Series
3430223Tom Swift in Captivity1912Victor Appleton
​
TOM SWIFT IN
CAPTIVITY
OR 
A Daring Escape by Airship
BY 
VICTOR APPLETON
AUTHOR OF "TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR-CYCLE," "TOM SWIFT AND HISWIRELESS MESSAGE," "TOM SWIFT IN THECITY OF GOLD," ETC.
ILLUSTRATED
NEW YORK
GROSSET & DUNLAP
PUBLISHERS
Made in the United States of America
​THERE WAS A RATTLING, BANGING NOISE, AND THE BIG PROPELLERS REVOLVED WITH INCREDIBLE SWIFTNESS.—Page 209.Tom Swift in Captivity.
​
CONTENTS
CHAPTER
PAGE
I
A Strange Request
1
II
The Circus Man
11
III
Tom Will Go
20
IV
"Look Out for My Rival!"
28
V
Andy Foger Learns Something
37
VI
Alarming News
48
VII
Fire on Board
57
VIII
A Narrow Escape
68
IX
"Forward March!"
76
X
A Wild Horse Stampede
85
XI
Caught in a Living Rope
94
XII
A Native Battle
105
XIII
The Desertion
113
XIV
In Giant Land
123
XV
In the "Palace" of the King
132
XVI
The Rival Circus Man
142
XVII
Held Captives
150
XVIII
Tom's Mysterious Box
158
XIX
Weak Giants
165
XX
The Lone Captive
176 ​
XXI
A royal Conspiracy
185
XXII
The Twin Giants
192
XXIII
A Surprise in the Night
197
XXIV
The Airship Flight
202
XXV
Tom's Giant—Conclusion
210
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published before January 1, 1927. It may be copyrighted outside the U.S. (see Help:Public domain).
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1395
Cached time: 20221017211901
Cache expiry: 86400
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.218 seconds
Real time usage: 0.346 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1080/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 25309/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4859/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 7762/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.116/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 3873960/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  327.362      1 -total
 34.06%  111.495     53 Template:Ts
 31.42%  102.852      1 Page:Tom_Swift_in_Captivity.djvu/9
 28.78%   94.216      1 Page:Tom_Swift_in_Captivity.djvu/10
 11.93%   39.038      1 Template:Header
  5.86%   19.199      1 Page:Tom_Swift_in_Captivity.djvu/6
  5.72%   18.721      1 Page:Tom_Swift_in_Captivity.djvu/7
  5.35%   17.523      1 Template:FI
  4.91%   16.074      1 Template:C
  3.45%   11.302      1 Template:PD-US
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:3430223-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211901 and revision id 10885304.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Tom_Swift_in_Captivity&oldid=10885304"
Categories: 1912 worksChildren's booksPD-USHidden category: Ready for export
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageSourceDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this page
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 31 January 2021, at 21:59.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Vikram and the Vampire or Tales of Hindu Devilry - Wikisource, the free online library
Vikram and the Vampire or Tales of Hindu Devilry - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Vikram and the Vampire or Tales of Hindu Devilry
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
A scan-backed, verifiable version of this work can be edited at index:Vikram and the vampire; or, Tales of Hindu devilry (IA vikramvampireort00burtrich).pdf.
If you would like to help, please see Help:Match and split and Help:Proofread.
The source document of this text is not known.
Please see this document's talk page for details for verification. "Source" means a location at which other users can find a copy of this work.  Ideally this will be a scanned copy of the original that can be uploaded to Wikimedia Commons and proofread. If not, it is preferably a URL; if one is not available, please explain on the talk page.
This work may need to be standardized using Wikisource's style guidelines.If you'd like to help, please review the help pages.
Vikram and the Vampire or Tales of Hindu Devilry by Richard Francis Burtonsister projects: Commons category, Wikidata item.
422127Vikram and the Vampire or Tales of Hindu DevilryRichard Francis Burton
1870 Preface by Richard Burton
1893 Preface by Isabel Burton
Introduction
Footnotes
THE VAMPIRE'S FIRST STORY. In which a man deceives a woman.[edit]
In Benares once reigned a mighty prince, by name Pratapamukut,
to whose eighth son Vajramukut happened the strangest adventure.
One morning, the young man, accompanied by the son of his
father's pradhan or prime minister, rode out hunting, and went far
into the jungle. At last the twain unexpectedly came upon a
beautiful "tank [FN#47]" of a prodigious size. It was surrounded
by short thick walls of fine baked brick; and flights and ramps of
cut-stone steps, half the length of each face, and adorned with
turrets, pendants, and finials, led down to the water. The
substantial plaster work and the masonry had fallen into disrepair,
and from the crevices sprang huge trees, under whose thick shade
the breeze blew freshly, and on whose balmy branches the birds
sang sweetly; the grey squirrels [FN#48] chirruped joyously as
they coursed one another up the gnarled trunks, and from the
pendent llianas the longtailed monkeys were swinging sportively.
The bountiful hand of Sravana [FN#49] had spread the earthen
rampart with a carpet of the softest grass and many-hued wild
flowers, in which were buzzing swarms of bees and myriads of
bright winged insects; and flocks of water fowl, wild geese
Brahmini ducks, bitterns, herons, and cranes, male and female,
were feeding on the narrow strip of brilliant green that belted the
long deep pool, amongst the broad-leaved lotuses with the lovely
blossoms, splashing through the pellucid waves, and basking
happily in the genial sun.
The prince and his friend wondered when they saw the beautiful
tank in the midst of a wild forest, and made many vain conjectures
about it. They dismounted, tethered their horses, and threw their
weapons upon the ground; then, having washed their hands and
faces, they entered a shrine dedicated to Mahadeva, and there
began to worship the presiding deity.
Whilst they were making their offerings, a bevy of maidens,
accompanied by a crowd of female slaves, descended the opposite
flight of steps. They stood there for a time, talking and laughing
and looking about them to see if any alligators infested the waters.
When convinced that the tank was safe, they disrobed themselves
in order to bathe. It was truly a splendid spectacle  
"Concerning which the less said the better," interrupted
RajaVikram in an offended tone.[FN#50]
--but did not last long. The Raja's daughter -- for the principal
maiden was a princess -- soon left her companions, who were
scooping up water with their palms and dashing it over one
another's heads, and proceeded to perform the rites of purification,
meditation, and worship. Then she began strolling with a friend
under the shade of a small mango grove.
The prince also left his companion sitting in prayer, and walked
forth into the forest. Suddenly the eyes of the Raja's son and the
Raja's daughter met. She started back with a little scream. He was
fascinated by her beauty, and began to say to himself, " O thou vile
Karma,[FN#51] why worriest thou me?"
Hearing this, the maiden smiled encouragement, but the poor
youth, between palpitation of the heart and hesitation about what
to say, was so confused that his tongue crave to his teeth. She
raised her eyebrows a little. There is nothing which women despise
in a man more than modesty, [FN#52] for mo-des-ty -- 
A violent shaking of the bag which hung behind Vikram's royal
back broke off the end of this offensive sentence. And the warrior
king did not cease that discipline till the Baital promised him to
preserve more decorum in his observations.
Still the prince stood before her with downcast eyes and suffused
cheeks: even the spur of contempt failed to arouse his energies.
Then the maiden called to her friend, who was picking jasmine
flowers so as not to witness the scene, and angrily asked why that
strange man was allowed to stand and stare at her? The friend, in
hot wrath, threatened to call the slave, and throw Vajramukut into
the pond unless he instantly went away with his impudence. But as
the prince was rooted to the spot, and really had not heard a word
of what had been said to him, the two women were obliged to
make the first move.
As they almost reached the tank, the beautiful maiden turned her
head to see what the poor modest youth was doing.
Vajramukut was formed in every way to catch a woman's eye. The
Raja's daughter therefore half forgave him his offence of mod ----.
Again she sweetly smiled, disclosing two rows of little opals. Then
descending to the water's edge, she stooped down and plucked a
lotus This she worshipped; next she placed it in her hair, then she
put it in her ear, then she bit it with her teeth, then she trod upon it
with her foot, then she raised it up again, and lastly she stuck it in
her bosom. After which she mounted her conveyance and went
home to her friends; whilst the prince, having become thoroughly
desponding and drowned in grief at separation from her, returned
to the minister's son.
"Females!" ejaculated the minister's son, speaking to himself in a
careless tone, when, his prayer finished, he left the temple, and sat
down upon the tank steps to enjoy the breeze. He presently drew a
roll of paper from under his waist-belt, and in a short time was
engrossed with his study. The women seeing this conduct, exerted
themselves in every possible way of wile to attract his attention
and to distract his soul. They succeeded only so far as to make him
roll his head with a smile, and to remember that such is always the
custom of man's bane; after which he turned over a fresh page of
manuscript. And although he presently began to wonder what had
become of the prince his master, he did not look up even once
from his study.
He was a philosopher, that young man. But after all, Raja Vikram,
what is mortal philosophy? Nothing but another name for
indifference! Who was ever philosophical about a thing truly loved
or really hated? -- no one! Philosophy, says Shankharacharya, is
either a gift of nature or the reward of study. But I, the Baital, the
devil, ask you, what is a born philosopher, save a man of cold
desires? And what is a bred philosopher but a man who has
survived his desires? A young philosopher? - a cold-blooded
youth! An elderly philosopher? --a leuco-phlegmatic old man!
Much nonsense, of a verity, ye hear in praise of nothing from your
Rajaship's Nine Gems of Science, and from sundry other such wise
fools.
Then the prince began to relate the state of his case, saying, " O
friend, I have seen a damsel, but whether she be a musician from
Indra's heaven, a maiden of the sea, a daughter of the serpent
kings, or the child of an earthly Raja, I cannot say."
"Describe her," said the statesman in embryo.
"Her face," quoth the prince, "was that of the full moon, her hair
like a swarm of bees hanging from the blossoms of the acacia, the
corners of her eyes touched her ears, her lips were sweet with lunar
ambrosia, her waist was that of a lion, and her walk the walk of a
king goose. [FN#53] As a garment, she was white; as a season, the
spring; as a flower, the jasmine; as a speaker, the kokila bird; as a
perfume, musk; as a beauty, Kamadeva; and as a being, Love. And
if she does not come into my possession I will not live; this I have
certainly determined upon."
The young minister, who had heard his prince say the same thing
more than once before, did not attach great importance to these
awful words. He merely remarked that, unless they mounted at
once, night would surprise them in the forest. Then the two young
men returned to their horses, untethered them, drew on their
bridles, saddled them, and catching up their weapons, rode slowly
towards the Raja's palace. During the three hours of return hardly a
word passed between the pair. Vajramukut not only avoided
speaking; he never once replied till addressed thrice in the loudest
voice.
The young minister put no more questions, "for," quoth he to
himself, "when the prince wants my counsel, he will apply for it."
In this point he had borrowed wisdom from his father, who held in
peculiar horror the giving of unasked- for advice. So, when he saw
that conversation was irksome to his master, he held his peace and
meditated upon what he called his "day-thought." It was his
practice to choose every morning some tough food for reflection,
and to chew the cud of it in his mind at times when, without such
employment, his wits would have gone wool-gathering. You may
imagine, Raja Vikram, that with a few years of this head work, the
minister's son became a very crafty young person.
After the second day the Prince Vajramukut, being restless from
grief at separation, fretted himself into a fever. Having given up
writing, reading, drinking, sleeping, the affairs entrusted to him by
his father, and everything else, he sat down, as he said, to die. He
used constantly to paint the portrait of the beautiful lotus gatherer,
and to lie gazing upon it with tearful eyes; then he would start up
and tear it to pieces and beat his forehead, and begin another
picture of a yet more beautiful face.
At last, as the pradhan's son had foreseen, he was summoned by
the young Raja, whom he found upon his bed, looking yellow and
complaining bitterly of headache. Frequent discussions upon the
subject of the tender passion had passed between the two youths,
and one of them had ever spoken of it so very disrespectfully that
the other felt ashamed to introduce it. But when his friend, with a
view to provoke communicativeness, advised a course of boiled
and bitter herbs and great attention to diet, quoting the hemistich
attributed to the learned physician Charndatta  
     A fever starve, but feed a cold,
the unhappy Vajramukut's fortitude abandoned him; he burst into
tears, and exclaimed," Whosoever enters upon the path of love
cannot survive it; and if (by chance) he should live, what is life to
him but a prolongation of his misery?"
"Yea," replied the minister's son, "the sage hath said -- 
The road of love is that which hath no beginning nor end;
Take thou heed of thyself, man I ere thou place foot upon it.
And the wise, knowing that there are three things whose effect
upon himself no man can foretell --namely, desire of woman, the
dice-box, and the drinking of ardent spirits - find total abstinence
from them the best of rules. Yet, after all, if there is no cow, we
must milk the bull."
The advice was, of course, excellent, but the hapless lover could
not help thinking that on this occasion it came a little too late.
However, after a pause he returned to the subject and said, "I have
ventured to tread that dangerous way, be its end pain or pleasure,
happiness or destruction." He then hung down his head and sighed
from the bottom of his heart.
"She is the person who appeared to us at the tank?" asked the
pradhan's son, moved to compassion by the state of his master.
The prince assented.
"O great king," resumed the minister's son, "at the time of going
away had she said anything to you? or had you said anything to
her?"
"Nothing!" replied the other laconically, when he found his friend
beginning to take an interest in the affair.
"Then," said the minister's son, "it will be exceedingly difficult to
get possession of her."
"Then," repeated the Raja's son, "I am doomed to death; to an early
and melancholy death!"
"Humph!" ejaculated the young statesman rather impatiently, "did
she make any sign, or give any hint? Let me know all that
happened: half confidences are worse than none."
Upon which the prince related everything that took place by the
side of the tank, bewailing the false shame which had made him
dumb, and concluding with her pantomime.
The pradhan's son took thought for a while. He thereupon seized
the opportunity of representing to his master all the evil effects of
bashfulness when women are concerned, and advised him, as he
would be a happy lover, to brazen his countenance for the next
interview.
Which the young Raja faithfully promised to do.
"And, now," said the other, "be comforted, O my master! I know
her name and her dwelling-place. When she suddenly plucked the
lotus flower and worshipped it, she thanked the gods for having
blessed her with a sight of your beauty."
Vajramukut smiled, the first time for the last month.
"When she applied it to her ear, it was as if she would have
explained to thee, 'I am a daughter of the Carnatic: [FN#54] and
when she bit it with her teeth, she meant to say that 'My father is
Raja Dantawat, [FN#55]' who, by-the-bye, has been, is, and ever
will be, a mortal foe to thy father."
Vajramukut shuddered.
"When she put it under her foot it meant, 'My name is Padmavati.
[FN#56]'"
Vajramukut uttered a cry of joy.
"And when she placed it in her bosom, 'You are truly dwelling in
my heart' was meant to be understood."
At these words the young Raja started up full of new life, and after
praising with enthusiasm the wondrous sagacity of his dear friend,
begged him by some contrivance to obtain the permission of his
parents, and to conduct him to her city. The minister's son easily
got leave for Vajramukut to travel, under pretext that his body
required change of water, and his mind change of scene. They both
dressed and armed themselves for the journey, and having taken
some jewels, mounted their horses and followed the road in that
direction in which the princess had gone.
Arrived after some days at the capital of the Carnatic, the
minister's son having disguised his master and himself in the garb
of travelling traders, alighted and pitched his little tent upon a clear
bit of ground in one of the suburbs. He then proceeded to inquire
for a wise woman, wanting, he said, to have his fortune told. When
the prince asked him what this meant, he replied that elderly dames
who professionally predict the future are never above [ministering
to the present, and therefore that, in such circumstances, they are
the properest persons to be consulted.
"Is this a treatise upon the subject of immorality, devil?"
demanded the King Vikram ferociously. The Baital declared that it
was not, but that he must tell his story.
The person addressed pointed to an old woman who, seated before
the door of her hut, was spinning at her wheel. Then the young
men went up to her with polite salutations and said, "Mother, we
are travelling traders, and our stock is coming after us; we have
come on in advance for the purpose of finding a place to live in. If
you will give us a house, we will remain there and pay you
highly."
The old woman, who was a physiognomist as well as a
fortune-teller, looked at the faces of the young men and liked
them, because their brows were wide, and their mouths denoted
generosity. Having listened to their words, she took pity upon them
and said kindly, "This hovel is yours, my masters, remain here as
long as you please." Then she led them into an inner room, again
welcomed them, lamented the poorness of her abode, and begged
them to lie down and rest themselves.
After some interval of time the old woman came to them once
more, and sitting down began to gossip. The minister's son upon
this asked her, "How is it with thy family, thy relatives, and
connections; and what are thy means of subsistence?" She replied,
"My son is a favourite servant in the household of our great king
Dantawat, and your slave is the wet-nurse of the Princess
Padmavati, his eldest child. From the coming on of old age," she
added, "I dwell in this house, but the king provides for my eating
and drinking. I go once a day to see the girl, who is a miracle of
beauty and goodness, wit and accomplishments, and returning
thence, I bear my own griefs at home. [FN#57]"
In a few days the young Vajramukut had, by his liberality, soft
speech, and good looks, made such progress in nurse Lakshmi's
affections that, by the advice of his companion, he ventured to
broach the subject ever nearest his heart. He begged his hostess,
when she went on the morrow to visit the charming Padmavati,
that she would be kind enough to slip a bit of paper into the
princess's hand.
"Son," she replied, delighted with the proposal -- and what old
woman would not be? --"there is no need for putting off so urgent
an affair till the morrow. Get your paper ready, and I will
immediately give it."
Trembling with pleasure, the prince ran to find his friend, who was
seated in the garden reading, as usual, and told him what the old
nurse had engaged to do. He then began to debate about how he
should write his letter, to cull sentences and to weigh phrases;
whether "light of my eyes" was not too trite, and "blood of my
liver" rather too forcible. At this the minister's son smiled, and
bade the prince not trouble his head with composition. He then
drew his inkstand from his waist shawl, nibbed a reed pen, and
choosing a piece of pink and flowered paper, he wrote upon it a
few lines. He then folded it, gummed it, sketched a lotus flower
upon the outside, and handing it to the young prince, told him to
give it to their hostess, and that all would be well.
The old woman took her staff in her hand and hobbled straight to
the palace. Arrived there, she found the Raja's daughter sitting
alone in her apartment. The maiden, seeing her nurse, immediately
arose, and making a respectful bow, led her to a seat and began the
most affectionate inquiries. After giving her blessing and sitting
for some time and chatting about indifferent matters, the nurse
said, " O daughter! in infancy I reared and nourished thee, now the
Bhagwan (Deity) has rewarded me by giving thee stature, beauty,
health, and goodness. My heart only longs to see the happiness of
thy womanhood, [FN#58] after which I shall depart in peace. I
implore thee read this paper, given to me by the handsomest and
the properest young man that my eyes have ever seen."
The princess, glancing at the lotus on the outside of the note,
slowly unfolded it and perused its contents, which were as follows:
                    1.
                She was to me the pearl that clings
                     To sands all hid from mortal
sight,
                Yet fit for diadems of kings,
                     The pure and lovely light.
                    2.
                She was to me the gleam of sun
                     That breaks the gloom of wintry
day;
                One moment shone my soul upon,
                     Then passed --how soon! - away.
                    3.
                She was to me the dreams of bliss
                     That float the dying eyes before,
                For one short hour shed happiness,
                     And fly to bless no more.
                    4.
                O light, again upon me shine;
                     O pearl, again delight my eyes;
                O dreams of bliss, again be mine! --
                     No! earth may not be Paradise.
I must not forget to remark, parenthetically, that the minister's son,
in order to make these lines generally useful, had provided them
with a last stanza in triplicate. "For lovers," he said sagely," are
either in the optative mood, the desperative, or the exultative."
This time he had used the optative. For the desperative he would
substitute:
                    4.
                The joys of life lie dead, lie dead,
                     The light of day is quenched in
gloom
                The spark of hope my heart hath fled
--
                     What now witholds me from the
tomb?
And this was the termination exultative, as he called it:
                    4.
                O joy I the pearl is mine again,
                     Once more the day is bright and
clear,
                And now 'tis real, then 'twas vain,
                     My dream of bliss - O heaven is
here!
The Princess Padmavati having perused this doggrel with a
contemptuous look, tore off the first word of the last line, and said
to the nurse, angrily, "Get thee gone, O mother of Yama, [FN#59]
O unfortunate creature, and take back this answer" --giving her the
scrap of paper -- "to the fool who writes such bad verses. I wonder
where he studied the humanities. Begone, and never do such an
action again!"
The old nurse, distressed at being so treated, rose up and returned
home. Vajramukut was too agitated to await her arrival, so he went
to meet her on the way. Imagine his disappointment when she gave
him the fatal word and repeated to him exactly what happened, not
forgetting to describe a single look! He felt tempted to plunge his
sword into his bosom; but Fortune interfered, and sent him to
consult his confidant.
"Be not so hasty and desperate, my prince," said the pradhan's son,
seeing his wild grief; "you have not understood her meaning. Later
in life you will be aware of the fact that, in nine cases out of ten, a
woman's 'no' is a distinct 'yes.' This morning's work has been good;
the maiden asked where you learnt the humanities, which being
interpreted signifies 'Who are you?"'
On the next day the prince disclosed his rank to old Lakshmi, who
naturally declared that she had always known it. The trust they
reposed in her made her ready to address Padmavati once more on
the forbidden subject. So she again went to the palace, and having
lovingly greeted her nursling, said to her, "The Raja's son, whose
heart thou didst fascinate on the brim of the tank, on the fifth day
of the moon, in the light half of the month Yeth, has come to my
house, and sends this message to thee: "Perform what you
promised; we have now come"; and I also tell thee that this prince
is worthy of thee: just as thou art beautiful, so is he endowed with
all good qualities of mind and body."
When Padmavati heard this speech she showed great anger, and,
rubbing sandal on her beautiful hands, she slapped the old
woman's cheeks, and cried, "Wretch, Daina (witch)! get out of my
house; did I not forbid thee to talk such folly in my presence?"
The lover and the nurse were equally distressed at having taken the
advice of the young minister, till he explained what the crafty
damsel meant. "When she smeared the sandal on her ten fingers,"
he explained, "and struck the old woman on the face, she signified
that when the remaining ten moonlight nights shall have passed
away she will meet you in the dark." At the same time he warned
his master that to all appearances the lady Padmavati was far too
clever to make a comfortable wife. The minister's son especially
hated talented intellectual, and strong-minded women; he had been
heard to describe the torments of Naglok [FN#60] as the
compulsory companionship of a polemical divine and a learned
authoress, well stricken in years and of forbidding aspect, as such
persons mostly are. Amongst womankind he admired --
theoretically, as became a philosopher --the small, plump,
laughing, chattering, unintellectual, and material-minded. And
therefore --excuse the digression, Raja Vikram --he married an old
maid, tall, thin, yellow, strictly proper, cold-mannered, a
conversationist, and who prided herself upon spirituality. But more
wonderful still, after he did marry her, he actually loved her --what
an incomprehensible being is man in these matters!
To return, however. The pradhan's son, who detected certain
symptoms of strong-mindedness in the Princess Padmavati,
advised his lord to be wise whilst wisdom availed him. This sage
counsel was, as might be guessed, most ungraciously rejected by
him for whose benefit it was intended. Then the sensible young
statesman rated himself soundly for having broken his father's rule
touching advice, and atoned for it by blindly forwarding the views
of his master.
After the ten nights of moonlight had passed, the old nurse was
again sent to the palace with the usual message. This time
Padmavati put saffron on three of her fingers, and again left their
marks on the nurse's cheek. The minister's son explained that this
was to crave delay for three days, and that on the fourth the lover
would have access to her.
When the time had passed the old woman again went and inquired
after her health and well-being. The princess was as usual very
wroth, and having personally taken her nurse to the western gate,
she called her "Mother of the elephant's trunk, [FN#61]" and drove
her out with threats of the bastinado if she ever came back. This
was reported to the young statesman, who, after a few minutes'
consideration, said, "The explanation of this matter is, that she has
invited you to-morrow, at nighttime, to meet her at this very gate.
"When brown shadows fell upon the face of earth, and here and
there a star spangled the pale heavens, the minister's son called
Vajramukut, who had been engaged in adorning himself at least
half that day. He had carefully shaved his cheeks and chin; his
mustachio was trimmed and curled; he had arched his eyebrows by
plucking out with tweezers the fine hairs around them; he had
trained his curly musk-coloured love-locks to hang gracefully
down his face; he had drawn broad lines of antimony along his
eyelids, a most brilliant sectarian mark was affixed to his forehead,
the colour of his lips had been heightened by chewing betel-nut --
"One would imagine that you are talking of a silly girl, not of a
prince, fiend!" interrupted Vikram, who did not wish his son to
hear what he called these fopperies and frivolities.
-- and whitened his neck by having it shaved (continued the Baital,
speaking quickly, as if determined not to be interrupted), and
reddened the tips of his ears by squeezing them, and made his teeth
shine by rubbing copper powder into the roots, and set off the
delicacy of his fingers by staining the tips with henna. He had not
been less careful with his dress: he wore a well-arranged turband,
which had taken him at least two hours to bind, and a rich suit of
brown stuff chosen for the adventure he was about to attempt, and
he hung about his person a number of various weapons, so as to
appear a hero -- which young damsels admire.
Vajramukut asked his friend how he looked, and smiled happily
when the other replied "Admirable!" His happiness was so great
that he feared it might not last, and he asked the minister's son how
best to conduct himself?
"As a conqueror, my prince!" answered that astute young man, "if
it so be that you would be one. When you wish to win a woman,
always impose upon her. Tell her that you are her master, and she
will forthwith believe herself to be your servant. Inform her that
she loves you, and forthwith she will adore you. Show her that you
care nothing for her, and she will think of nothing but you. Prove
to her by your demeanour that you consider her a slave, and she
will become your pariah. But above all things --excuse me if I
repeat myself too often  --beware of the fatal virtue which men call
modesty and women sheepishness. Recollect the trouble it has
given us, and the danger which we have incurred: all this might
have been managed at a tank within fifteen miles of your royal
father's palace. And allow me to say that you may still thank your
stars: in love a lost opportunity is seldom if ever recovered. The
time to woo a woman is the moment you meet her, before she has
had time to think; allow her the use of reflection and she may
escape the net. And after avoiding the rock of Modesty, fall not, I
conjure you, into the gulf of Security. I fear the lady Padmavati,
she is too clever and too prudent. When damsels of her age draw
the sword of Love, they throw away the scabbard of Precaution.
But you yawn  --I weary you --it is time for us to move."
Two watches of the night had passed, and there was profound
stillness on earth. The young men then walked quietly through the
shadows, till they reached the western gate of the palace, and
found the wicket ajar. The minister's son peeped in and saw the
porter dozing, stately as a Brahman deep in the Vedas, and behind
him stood a veiled woman seemingly waiting for somebody. He
then returned on tiptoe to the place where he had left his master,
and with a parting caution against modesty and security, bade him
fearlessly glide through the wicket. Then having stayed a short
time at the gate listening with anxious ear, he went back to the old
woman's house.
Vajramukut penetrating to the staircase, felt his hand grasped by
the veiled figure, who motioning him to tread lightly, led him
quickly forwards. They passed under several arches, through dim
passages and dark doorways, till at last running up a flight of stone
steps they reached the apartments of the princess.
Vajramukut was nearly fainting as the flood of splendour broke
upon him. Recovering himself he gazed around the rooms, and
presently a tumult of delight invaded his soul, and his body bristled
with joy. [FN#62] The scene was that of fairyland. Golden censers
exhaled the most costly perfumes, and gemmed vases bore the
most beautiful flowers; silver lamps containing fragrant oil
illuminated doors whose panels were wonderfully decorated, and
walls adorned with pictures in which such figures were formed that
on seeing them the beholder was enchanted. On one side of the
room stood a bed of flowers and a couch covered with brocade of
gold, and strewed with freshly-culled jasmine flowers. On the
other side, arranged in proper order, were attar holders,
betel-boxes, rose-water bottles, trays, and silver cases with four
partitions for essences compounded of rose leaves, sugar, and
spices, prepared sandal wood, saffron, and pods of musk. Scattered
about a stuccoed floor white as crystal, were coloured caddies of
exquisite confections, and in others sweetmeats of various
kinds.[FN#63] Female attendants clothed in dresses of various
colours were standing each according to her rank, with hands
respectfully joined. Some were reading plays and beautiful poems,
others danced and others performed with glittering fingers and
flashing arms on various instruments --the ivory lute, the ebony
pipe and the silver kettledrum. In short, all the means and
appliances of pleasure and enjoyment were there; and any
description of the appearance of the apartments, which were the
wonder of the age, is impossible.
Then another veiled figure, the beautiful Princess Padmavati, came
up and disclosed herself, and dazzled the eyes of her delighted
Vajramukut. She led him into an alcove, made him sit down,
rubbed sandal powder upon his body, hung a garland of jasmine
flowers round his neck, sprinkled rose-water over his dress, and
began to wave over his head a fan of peacock feathers with a
golden handle.
Said the prince, who despite all efforts could not entirely shake off
his unhappy habit of being modest, "Those very delicate hands of
yours are not fit to ply the pankha.[FN#64] Why do you take so
much trouble? I am cool and refreshed by the sight of you. Do give
the fan to me and sit down."
"Nay, great king!" replied Padmavati, with the most fascinating of
smiles, "you have taken so much trouble for my sake in coming
here, it is right that I perform service for you."
Upon which her favourite slave, taking the pankha from the hand
of the princess, exclaimed, "This is my duty. I will perform the
service; do you two enjoy yourselves!"
The lovers then began to chew betel, which, by the bye, they
disposed of in little agate boxes which they drew from their
pockets, and they were soon engaged in the tenderest conversation.
Here the Baital paused for a while, probably to take breath. Then
he resumed his tale as follows:
In the meantime, it became dawn; the princess concealed him; and
when night returned they again engaged in the same innocent
pleasures. Thus day after day sped rapidly by. Imagine, if you can,
the youth's felicity; he was of an ardent temperament, deeply
enamoured, barely a score of years old, and he had been strictly
brought up by serious parents. He therefore resigned himself
entirely to the siren for whom he willingly forgot the world, and he
wondered at his good fortune, which had thrown in his way a
conquest richer than all the mines of Meru.[FN#65] He could not
sufficiently admire his Padmavati's grace, beauty, bright wit, and
numberless accomplishments. Every morning, for vanity's sake, he
learned from her a little useless knowledge in verse as well as
prose, for instance, the saying of the poet -- 
    Enjoy the present hour, 'tis shine; be this, O man, thy law;
    Who e'er resew the yester? Who the morrow e'er foresaw?
And this highly philosophical axiom -- 
    Eat, drink, and love --the rest's not worth a fillip.
"By means of which he hoped, Raja Vikram!" said the demon, not
heeding his royal carrier's "ughs" and "poohs," "to become in
course of time almost as clever as his mistress."
Padmavati, being, as you have seen, a maiden of superior mind,
was naturally more smitten by her lover's dulness than by any
other of his qualities; she adored it, it was such a contrast to
herself.[FN#66] At first she did what many clever women do --she
invested him with the brightness of her own imagination. Still
water, she pondered, runs deep; certainly under this disguise must
lurk a brilliant fancy, a penetrating but a mature and ready
judgment --are they not written by nature's hand on that broad high
brow? With such lovely mustachios can he be aught but generous,
noble-minded, magnanimous? Can such eyes belong to any but a
hero? And she fed the delusion. She would smile upon him with
intense fondness, when, after wasting hours over a few lines of
poetry, he would misplace all the adjectives and barbarously
entreat the metre. She laughed with gratification, when, excited by
the bright sayings that fell from her lips, the youth put forth some
platitude, dim as the lamp in the expiring fire-fly. When he slipped
in grammar she saw malice under it, when he retailed a borrowed
jest she called it a good one, and when he used --as princes
sometimes will --bad language, she discovered in it a charming
simplicity.
At first she suspected that the stratagems which had won her heart
were the results of a deep-laid plot proceeding from her lover. But
clever women are apt to be rarely sharp-sighted in every matter
which concerns themselves. She frequently determined that a third
was in the secret. She therefore made no allusion to it. Before long
the enamoured Vajramukut had told her everything, beginning
with the diatribe against love pronounced by the minister's son,
and ending with the solemn warning that she, the pretty princess,
would some day or other play her husband a foul trick.
"If I do not revenge myself upon him," thought the beautiful
Padmavati, smiling like an angel as she listened to the youth's
confidence, "may I become a gardener's ass in the next birth!"
Having thus registered a vow, she broke silence, and praised to the
skies the young pradhan's wisdom and sagacity; professed herself
ready from gratitude to become his slave, and only hoped that one
day or other she might meet that true friend by whose skill her soul
had been gratified in its dearest desire. "Only," she concluded, "I
am convinced that now my Vajramukut knows every corner of his
little Padmavati's heart, he will never expect her to do anything but
love, admire, adore and kiss him!" Then suiting the action to the
word, she convinced him that the young minister had for once been
too crabbed and cynic in his philosophy.
But after the lapse of a month Vajramukut, who had eaten and
drunk and slept a great deal too much, and who had not once
hunted, became bilious in body and in mind melancholic. His face
turned yellow, and so did the whites of his eyes; he yawned, as
liver patients generally do, complained occasionally of sick
headaches, and lost his appetite: he became restless and anxious,
and once when alone at night he thus thought aloud: "I have given
up country, throne, home, and everything else, but the friend by
means of whom this happiness was obtained I have not seen for the
long length of thirty days. What will he say to himself, and how
can I know what has happened to him?"
In this state of things he was sitting, and in the meantime the
beautiful princess arrived. She saw through the matter, and lost not
a moment in entering upon it. She began by expressing her
astonishment at her lover's fickleness and fondness for change, and
when he was ready to wax wroth, and quoted the words of the
sage, "A barren wife may be superseded by another in the eighth
year; she whose children all die, in the tenth; she who brings forth
only daughters, in the eleventh; she who scolds, without delay,"
thinking that she alluded to his love, she smoothed his temper by
explaining that she referred to his forgetting his friend. "How is it
possible, O my soul," she asked with the softest of voices, that
thou canst happiness here whilst thy heart is wandering there?
Why didst thou conceal this from me, O astute one? Was it for fear
of distressing me? Think better of thy wife than to suppose that she
would ever separate thee from one to whom we both owe so much!
"After this Padmavati advised, nay ordered, her lover to go forth
that night, and not to return till his mind was quite at ease, and she
begged him to take a few sweetmeats and other trifles as a little
token of her admiration and regard for the clever young man of
whom she had heard so much.
Vajramukut embraced her with a transport of gratitude, which so
inflamed her anger, that fearing lest the cloak of concealment
might fall from her countenance, she went away hurriedly to find
the greatest delicacies which her comfit boxes contained. Presently
she returned, carrying a bag of sweetmeats of every kind for her
lover, and as he rose up to depart, she put into his hand a little
parcel of sugar-plums especially intended for the friend; they were
made up with her own delicate fingers, and they would please, she
flattered herself, even his discriminating palate.
The young prince, after enduring a number of farewell embraces
and hopings for a speedy return, and last words ever beginning
again, passed safely through the palace gate, and with a relieved
aspect walked briskly to the house of the old nurse. Although it
was midnight his friend was still sitting on his mat.
The two young men fell upon one another's bosoms and embraced
affectionately. They then began to talk of matters nearest their
hearts. The Raja's son wondered at seeing the jaded and haggard
looks of his companion, who did not disguise that they were
caused by his anxiety as to what might have happened to his friend
at the hand of so talented and so superior a princess. Upon which
Vajramukut, who now thought Padmavati an angel, and his late
abode a heaven, remarked with formality -- and two blunders to
one quotation --that abilities properly directed win for a man the
happiness of both worlds.
The pradhan's son rolled his head.
"Again on your hobby-horse, nagging at talent whenever you find
it in others! " cried the young prince with a pun, which would have
delighted Padmavati. "Surely you are jealous of her!" he resumed,
anything but pleased with the dead silence that had received his
joke; "jealous of her cleverness, and of her love for me. She is the
very best creature in the world. Even you, woman-hater as you are,
would own it if you only knew all the kind messages she sent, and
the little pleasant surprise that she has prepared for you. There!
take and eat; they are made by her own dear hands!" cried the
young Raja, producing the sweetmeats. "As she herself taught me
to say -
        Thank God I am a man,
    Not a philosopher!"
"The kind messages she sent me! The pleasant surprise she has
prepared for me!" repeated the minister's son in a hard, dry tone.
"My lord will be pleased to tell me how she heard of my name?"
"I was sitting one night," replied the prince, "in anxious thought
about you, when at that moment the princess coming in and seeing
my condition, asked, 'Why are you thus sad? Explain the cause to
me.' I then gave her an account of your cleverness, and when she
heard it she gave me permission to go and see you, and sent these
sweetmeats for you: eat them and I shall be pleased."
"Great king!" rejoined the young statesman, "one thing vouchsafe
to hear from me. You have not done well in that you have told my
name. You should never let a woman think that your left hand
knows the secret which she confided to your right, much less that
you have shared it to a third person. Secondly, you did evil in
allowing her to see the affection with which you honour your
unworthy servant --a woman ever hates her lover's or husband's
friend."
"What could I do?" rejoined the young Raja, in a querulous tone of
voice. "When I love a woman I like to tell her everything --to have
no secrets from her --to consider her another self ----"
"Which habit," interrupted the pradhan's son, "you will lose when
you are a little older, when you recognize the fact that love is
nothing but a bout, a game of skill between two individuals of
opposite sexes: the one seeking to gain as much, and the other
striving to lose as little as possible; and that the sharper of the
twain thus met on the chessboard must, in the long run, win. And
reticence is but a habit. Practise it for a year, and you will find it
harder to betray than to conceal your thoughts. It hath its joy also.
Is there no pleasure, think you, when suppressing an outbreak of
tender but fatal confidence in saying to yourself, 'O, if she only
knew this?' 'O, if she did but suspect that?' Returning, however, to
the sugar-plums, my life to a pariah's that they are poisoned!"
"Impossible!" exclaimed the prince, horror-struck at the thought;
"what you say, surely no one ever could do. If a mortal fears not
his fellow-mortal, at least he dreads the Deity."
"I never yet knew," rejoined the other, "what a woman in love does
fear. However, prince, the trial is easy. Come here, Muti!" cried he
to the old woman's dog, "and off with thee to that three-headed
kinsman of shine, that attends upon his amiable-looking
master.[FN#67]"
Having said this, he threw one of the sweetmeats to the dog; the
animal ate it, and presently writhing and falling down, died.
"The wretch! O the wretch!" cried Vajramukut, transported with
wonder and anger. " And I loved her! But now it is all over. I dare
not associate with such a calamity!"
"What has happened, my lord, has happened!" quoth the minister's
son calmly. "I was prepared for something of this kind from so
talented a princess. None commit such mistakes, such blunders,
such follies as your clever women; they cannot even turn out a
crime decently executed. O give me dulness with one idea, one
aim, one desire. O thrice blessed dulness that combines with
happiness, power."
This time Vajramukut did not defend talent.
"And your slave did his best to warn you against perfidy. But now
my heart is at rest. I have tried her strength. She has attempted and
failed; the defeat will prevent her attempting again --just yet. But
let me ask you to put to yourself one question. Can you be happy
without her?"
"Brother!" replied the prince, after a pause, "I cannot"; and he
blushed as he made the avowal.
"Well," replied the other, "better confess then conceal that fact; we
must now meet her on the battle-field, and beat her at her own
weapons --cunning. I do not willingly begin treachery with
women, because, in the first place, I don't like it; and secondly, I
know that they will certainly commence practicing it upon me,
after which I hold myself justified in deceiving them. And
probably this will be a good wife; remember that she intended to
poison me, not you. During the last month my fear has been lest
my prince had run into the tiger's brake. Tell me, my lord, when
does the princess expect you to return to her?"
"She bade me," said the young Raja, "not to return till my mind
was quite at ease upon the subject of m talented friend."
"This means that she expects you back to-morrow night, as you
cannot enter the palace before. And now I will retire to my cot, as
it is there that I am wont to ponder over my plans. Before dawn my
thought shall mature one which must place the beautiful Padmavati
in your power."
"A word before parting," exclaimed the prince "you know my
father has already chosen a spouse for me; what will he say if I
bring home a second? "
"In my humble opinion," said the minister's son rising to retire,
"woman is a monogamous, man a polygamous, creature, a fact
scarcely established in physio- logical theory, but very observable
in every-day practice For what said the poet? -- 
         Divorce, friend! Re-wed thee! The spring draweth
near,[FN#68]
         And a wife's but an almanac --good for the year.
If your royal father say anything to you, refer him to what he
himself does."
Reassured by these words, Vajramukut bade his friend a cordial
good-night and sought his cot, where he slept soundly, despite the
emotions of the last few hours. The next day passed somewhat
slowly. In the evening, when accompanying his master to the
palace, the minister's son gave him the following directions.
"Our object, dear my lord, is how to obtain possession of the
princess. Take, then, this trident, and hide it carefully when you
see her show the greatest love and affection. Conceal what has
happened, and when she, wondering at your calmness, asks about
me, tell her that last night I was weary and out of health, that
illness prevented my eating her sweetmeats, but that I shall eat
them for supper to-night. When she goes to sleep, then, taking off
her jewels and striking her left leg with the trident, instantly come
away to me. But should she lie awake, rub upon your thumb a little
of this --do not fear, it is only a powder of grubs fed on verdigris --
and apply it to her nostrils. It would make an elephant senseless, so
be careful how you approach it to your own face."
Vajramukut embraced his friend, and passed safely through the
palace gate. He found Padmavati awaiting him; she fell upon his
bosom and looked into his eyes, and deceived herself, as clever
women will do. Overpowered by her joy and satisfaction, she now
felt certain that her lover was hers eternally, and that her treachery
had not been discovered; so the beautiful princess fell into a deep
sleep.
Then Vajramukut lost no time in doing as the minister's son had
advised, and slipped out of the room, carrying off Padmavati's
jewels and ornaments. His counsellor having inspected them, took
up a sack and made signs to his master to follow him. Leaving the
horses and baggage at the nurse's house, they walked to a
burning-place outside the city. The minister's son there buried his
dress, together with that of the prince, and drew from the sack the
costume of a religious ascetic: he assumed this himself, and gave
to his companion that of a disciple. Then quoth the guru (spiritual
preceptor) to his chela (pupil), "Go, youth, to the bazar, and sell
these jewels, remembering to let half the jewellers in the place see
the things, and if any one lay hold of thee, bring him to me."
Upon which, as day had dawned, Vajramukut carried the princess's
ornaments to the market, and entering the nearest goldsmith's shop,
offered to sell them, and asked what they were worth. As your
majesty well knows, gardeners, tailors, and goldsmiths are
proverbially dishonest, and this man was no exception to the rule.
He looked at the pupil's face and wondered, because he had
brought articles whose value he did not appear to know. A thought
struck him that he might make a bargain which would fill his
coffers, so he offered about a thousandth part of the price. This the
pupil rejected, because he wished the affair to go further. Then the
goldsmith, seeing him about to depart, sprang up and stood in the
door way, threatening to call the officers of justice if the young
man refused to give up the valuables which he said had lately been
stolen from his shop. As the pupil only laughed at this, the
goldsmith thought seriously of executing his threat, hesitating only
because he knew that the officers of justice would gain more than
he could by that proceeding. As he was still in doubt a shadow
darkened his shop, and in entered the chief jeweller of the city. The
moment the ornaments were shown to him he recognized them,
and said, "These jewels belong to Raja Dantawat's daughter; I
know them well, as I set them only a few months ago!" Then he
turned to the disciple, who still held the valuables in his hand, and
cried, "Tell me truly whence you received them?"
While they were thus talking, a crowd of ten or twenty persons had
collected, and at length the report reached the superintendent of the
archers. He sent a soldier to bring before him the pupil, the
goldsmith, and the chief jeweller, together with the ornaments.
And when all were in the hall of justice, he looked at the jewels
and said to the young man, "Tell me truly, whence have you
obtained these?"
"My spiritual preceptor," said Vajramukut, pretending great fear,
"who is now worshipping in the cemetery outside the town, gave
me these white stones, with an order to sell them. How know I
whence he obtained them? Dismiss me, my lord, for I am an
innocent man."
"Let the ascetic be sent for," commanded the kotwal.[FN#69]
Then, having taken both of them, along with the jewels, into the
presence of King Dantawat, he related the whole circumstances.
"Master," said the king on hearing the statement, "whence have
you obtained these jewels?"
The spiritual preceptor, before deigning an answer, pulled from
under his arm the hide of a black antelope, which he spread out
and smoothed deliberately before using it as an asan.[FN#70] He
then began to finger a rosary of beads each as large as an egg, and
after spending nearly an hour in mutterings and in rollings of the
head, he looked fixedly at the Raja, and repined:
"By Shiva! great king, they are mine own. On the fourteenth of the
dark half of the moon at night, I had gone into a place where dead
bodies are burned, for the purpose of accomplishing a witch's
incantation. After long and toilsome labour she appeared, but her
demeanour was so unruly that I was forced to chastise her. I struck
her with this, my trident, on the left leg, if memory serves me. As
she continued to be refractory, in order to punish her I took off all
her jewels and clothes, and told her to go where she pleased. Even
this had little effect upon her --never have I looked upon so
perverse a witch. In this way the jewels came into my possession."
Raja Dantawat was stunned by these words. He begged the ascetic
not to leave the palace for a while, and forthwith walked into the
private apartments of the women. Happening first to meet the
queen dowager, he said to her, "Go, without losing a minute, O my
mother, and look at Padmavati's left leg, and see if there is a mark
or not, and what sort of a mark!" Presently she returned, and
coming to the king said, "Son, I find thy daughter lying upon her
bed, and complaining that she has met with an accident; and
indeed Padmavati must be in great pain. I found that some sharp
instrument with three points had wounded her. The girl says that a
nail hurt her, but I never yet heard of a nail making three holes.
However, we must all hasten, or there will be erysipelas,
tumefaction, gangrene, mortification, amputation, and perhaps
death in the house," concluded the old queen, hurrying away in the
pleasing anticipation of these ghastly consequences.
For a moment King Dantawat's heart was ready to break. But he
was accustomed to master his feelings; he speedily applied the
reins of reflection to the wild steed of passion. He thought to
himself, "the affairs of one's household, the intentions of one's
heart, and whatever one's losses may be, should not be disclosed to
any one. Since Padmavati is a witch, she is no longer my daughter.
I will verily go forth and consult the spiritual preceptor."
With these words the king went outside, where the guru was still
sitting upon his black hide, making marks with his trident on the
floor. Having requested that the pupil might be sent away, and
having cleared the room, he said to the jogi, "O holy man! what
punishment for the heinous crime of witchcraft is awarded to a
woman in the Dharma- Shastra [FN#71]?"
"Greet king!" replied the devotee, "in the Dharma Shastra it is thus
written: 'If a Brahman, a cow, a woman, a child, or any other
person whatsoever who may be dependent on us, should be guilty
of a perfidious act, their punishment is that they be banished the
country.' However much they may deserve death, we must not spill
their blood, as Lakshmi[FN#72] flies in horror from the deed."
Hearing these words the Raja dismissed the guru with many thanks
and large presents. He waited till nightfall and then ordered a band
of trusty men to seize Padmavati without alarming the household,
and to carry her into a distant jungle full of fiends, tigers, and
bears, and there to abandon her.
In the meantime, the ascetic and his pupil hurrying to the cemetery
resumed their proper dresses; they then went to the old nurse's
house, rewarded her hospitality till she wept bitterly, girt on their
weapons, and mounting their horses, followed the party which
issued from the gate of King Dantawat's palace. And it may easily
be believed that they found little difficulty in persuading the poor
girl to exchange her chance in the wild jungle for the prospect of
becoming Vajramukut's wife --lawfully wedded at Benares. She
did not even ask if she was to have a rival in the house, --a
question which women, you know, never neglect to put under
usual circumstances. After some days the two pilgrims of one love
arrived at the house of their fathers, and to all, both great and
small, excess in joy came.
"Now, Raja Vikram!" said the Baital, "you have not spoken much;
doubtless you are engrossed by the interest of a story wherein a
man beats a woman at her own weapon --deceit. But I warn you
that you will assuredly fall into Narak (the infernal regions) if you
do not make up your mind upon and explain this matter. Who was
the most to blame amongst these four? the lover[FN#73] the
lover's friend, the girl, or the father?"
"For my part I think Padmavati was the worst, she being at the
bottom of all their troubles," cried Dharma Dhwaj. The king said
something about young people and the two senses of seeing and
hearing, but his son's sentiment was so sympathetic that he at once
pardoned the interruption. At length, determined to do justice
despite himself, Vikram said, "Raja Dantawat is the person most at
fault."
"In what way was he at fault? " asked the Baital curiously.
King Vikram gave him this reply: "The Prince Vajramukut being
tempted of the love-god was insane, and therefore not responsible
for his actions. The minister's son performed his master's business
obediently, without considering causes or asking questions --a very
excellent quality in a dependent who is merely required to do as he
is bid. With respect to the young woman, I have only to say that
she was a young woman, and thereby of necessity a possible
murderess. But the Raja, a prince, a man of a certain age and
experience, a father of eight! He ought never to have been
deceived by so shallow a trick, nor should he, without reflection,
have banished his daughter from the country."
"Gramercy to you!" cried the Vampire, bursting into a discordant
shout of laughter, "I now return to my tree. By my tail! I never yet
heard a Raja so readily condemn a Raja." With these words he
slipped out of the cloth, leaving it to hang empty over the great
king's shoulder.
Vikram stood for a moment, fixed to the spot with blank dismay.
Presently, recovering himself, he retraced his steps, followed by
his son, ascended the sires-tree, tore down the Baital, packed him
up as before, and again set out upon his way.
Soon afterwards a voice sounded behind the warrior king's back,
and began to tell another true story.
       THE VAMPIRE'S SECOND STORY.
Of the Relative Villany of Men and Women.
In the great city of Bhogavati dwelt, once upon a time, a young
prince, concerning whom I may say that he strikingly resembled
this amiable son of your majesty.
Raja Vikram was silent, nor did he acknowledge the Baital's
indirect compliment. He hated flattery, but he liked, when
flattered, to be flattered in his own person; a feature in their royal
patron's character which the Nine Gems of Science had turned to
their own account.
Now the young prince Raja Ram (continued the tale teller) had an
old father, concerning whom I may say that he was exceedingly
unlike your Rajaship, both as a man and as a parent. He was fond
of hunting, dicing, sleeping by day, drinking at night, and eating
perpetual tonics, while he delighted in the idleness of watching
nautch girls, and the vanity of falling in love. But he was adored
by his children because he took the trouble to win their hearts. He
did not lay it down as a law of heaven that his offspring would
assuredly go to Patala if they neglected the duty of bestowing upon
him without cause all their affections, as your moral, virtuous, and
highly respectable fathers are only too apt ----. Aie! Aie!
These sounds issued from the Vampire's lips as the warrior king,
speechless with wrath, passed his hand behind his back, and
viciously twisted up a piece of the speaker's skin. This caused the
Vampire to cry aloud, more however, it would appear, in derision
than in real suffering, for he presently proceeded with the same
subject.
Fathers, great king, may be divided into three kinds; and be it said
aside, that mothers are the same. Firstly, we have the parent of
many ideas, amusing, pleasant, of course poor, and the idol of his
children. Secondly, there is the parent with one idea and a half.
This sort of man would, in your place, say to himself, "That demon
fellow speaks a manner of truth. I am not above learning from him,
despite his position in life. I will carry out his theory, just to see
how far it goes"; and so saying, he wends his way home, and treats
his young ones with prodigious kindness for a time, but it is not
lasting. Thirdly, there is the real one-idea'd type of parent-yourself,
O warrior king Vikram, an admirable example. You learn in youth
what you are taught: for instance, the blessed precept that the green
stick is of the trees of Paradise; and in age you practice what you
have learned. You cannot teach yourselves anything before your
beards sprout, and when they grow stiff you cannot be taught by
others. If any one attempt to change your opinions you cry,
         What is new is not true,
         What is true is not new.
and you rudely pull his hand from the subject. Yet have you your
uses like other things of earth. In life you are good working camels
for the mill-track, and when you die your ashes are not worse
compost than those of the wise.
Your Rajaship will observe (continued the Vampire, as Vikram
began to show symptoms of ungovernable anger) that I have been
concise in treating this digression. Had I not been so, it would have
led me far indeed from my tale. Now to return.
When the old king became air mixed with air, the young king,
though he found hardly ten pieces of silver in the paternal treasury
and legacies for thousands of golden ounces, yet mourned his loss
with the deepest grief. He easily explained to himself the reckless
emptiness of the royal coffers as a proof of his dear kind parent's
goodness, because he loved him.
But the old man had left behind him, as he could not carry it off
with him, a treasure more valuable than gold and silver: one
Churaman, a parrot, who knew the world, and who besides
discoursed in the most correct Sanscrit. By sage counsel and wise
guidance this admirable bird soon repaired his young master's
shattered fortunes.
One day the prince said, "Parrot, thou knowest everything: tell me
where there is a mate fit for me. The shastras inform us, respecting
the choice of a wife, 'She who is not descended from his paternal
or maternal ancestors within the sixth degree is eligible by a high
caste man for nuptials. In taking a wife let him studiously avoid
the following families, be they ever so great, or ever so rich in
kine, goats, sheep, gold, or grain: the family which has omitted
prescribed acts of devotion; that which has produced no male
children; that in which the Veda (scripture) has not been read; that
which has thick hair on the body; and that in which members have
been subject to hereditary disease. Let a person choose for his wife
a girl whose person has no defect; who has an agreeable name;
who walks gracefully, like a young elephant; whose hair and teeth
are moderate in quantity and in size; and whose body is of
exquisite softness.'"
"Great king," responded the parrot Churaman, "there is in the
country of Magadh a Raja, Magadheshwar by name, and he has a
daughter called Chandravati. You will marry her; she is very
learned, and, what is better far, very fait. She is of yellow colour,
with a nose like the flower of the sesamum; her legs are taper, like
the plantain-tree; her eyes are large, like the principal leaf of the
lotus; her eye-brows stretch towards her ears; her lips are red, like
the young leaves of the mango-tree; her face is like the full moon;
her voice is like the sound of the cuckoo; her arms reach to her
knees; her throat is like the pigeon's; her flanks are thin, like those
of the lion; her hair hangs in curls only down to her waist; her teeth
are like the seeds of the pomegranate; and her gait is that of the
drunken elephant or the goose."
On hearing the parrot's speech, the king sent for an astrologer, and
asked him, "Whom shall I marry?" The wise man, having
consulted his art, replied, "Chandravati is the name of the maiden,
and your marriage with her will certainly take place." Thereupon
the young Raja, though he had never seen his future queen, became
incontinently enamoured of her. He summoned a Brahman, and
sent him to King Magadheshwar, saying, "If you arrange
satisfactorily this affair of our marriage we will reward you
amply"-a promise which lent wings to the priest.
Now it so happened that this talented and beautiful princess had a
jay,[FN#74] whose name was Madan-manjari or Love-garland.
She also possessed encyclopaedic knowledge after her degree, and,
like the parrot, she spoke excellent Sanscrit.
Be it briefly said, O warrior king-for you think that I am talking
fables--that in the days of old, men had the art of making birds
discourse in human language. The invention is attributed to a great
philosopher, who split their tongues, and after many generations
produced a selected race born with those members split. He altered
the shapes of their skulls by fixing ligatures behind the occiput,
which caused the sinciput to protrude, their eyes to become
prominent, and their brains to master the art of expressing thoughts
in words.
But this wonderful discovery, like those of great philosophers
generally, had in it a terrible practical flaw The birds beginning to
speak, spoke wisely and so well, they told the truth so persistently,
they rebuked their brethren of the featherless skins so openly, they
flattered them so little and they counselled them so much, that
mankind presently grew tired of hearing them discourse. Thus the
art gradually fell into desuetude, and now it is numbered with the
things that were.
One day the charming Princess Chandravati was sitting in
confidential conversation with her jay. The dialogue was not
remarkable, for maidens in all ages seldom consult their
confidantes or speculate upon the secrets of futurity, or ask to have
dreams interpreted, except upon one subject. At last the princess
said, for perhaps the hundredth time that month, "Where, O jay, is
there a husband worthy of me?"
"Princess," replied Madan-manjari, "I am happy at length to be
able as willing to satisfy your just curiosity. For just it is, though
the delicacy of our sex --"
"Now, no preaching!" said the maiden; "or thou shalt have salt
instead of sugar for supper."
Jays, your Rajaship, are fond of sugar. So the confidante retained a
quantity of good advice which she was about to produce, and
replied,
"I now see clearly the ways of Fortune. Raja Ram, king of
Bhogavati, is to be thy husband. He shall be happy in thee and thou
in him, for he is young and handsome, rich and generous,
good-tempered, not too clever, and without a chance of being an
invalid."
Thereupon the princess, although she had never seen her future
husband, at once began to love him. In fact, though neither had set
eyes upon the other, both were mutually in love.
"How can that be, sire?" asked the young Dharma Dhwaj of his
father. " I always thought that --"
The great Vikram interrupted his son, and bade him not to ask silly
questions. Thus he expected to neutralize the evil effects of the
Baital's doctrine touching the amiability of parents unlike himself.
Now, as both these young people (resumed the Baital) were of
princely family and well to do in the world, the course of their love
was unusually smooth. When the Brahman sent by Raja Ram had
reached Magadh, and had delivered his King's homage to the Raja
Magadheshwar, the latter received him with distinction, and agreed
to his proposal. The beautiful princess's father sent for a Brahman
of his own, and charging him with nuptial gifts and the customary
presents, sent him back to Bhogavati in company with the other
envoy, and gave him this order, "Greet Raja Ram, on my behalf,
and after placing the tilak or mark upon his forehead, return here
with all speed. When you come back I will get all things ready for
the marriage."
Raja Ram, on receiving the deputation, was greatly pleased, and
after generously rewarding the Brahmans and making all the
necessary preparations, he set out in state for the land of Magadha,
to claim his betrothed.
In due season the ceremony took place with feasting and bands of
music, fireworks and illuminations, rehearsals of scripture, songs,
entertainments, processions, and abundant noise. And hardly had
the turmeric disappeared from the beautiful hands and feet of the
bride, when the bridegroom took an affectionate leave of his new
parents - he had not lived long in the house - and receiving the
dowry and the bridal gifts, set out for his own country.
Chandravati was dejected by leaving her mother, and therefore she
was allowed to carry with her the jay, Madanmanian. She soon
told her husband the wonderful way in which she had first heard
his name, and he related to her the advantage which he had derived
from confabulation with Churaman, his parrot.
"Then why do we not put these precious creatures into one cage,
after marrying them according to the rites of the angelic marriage
(Gandharva-lagana)?" said the charming queen. Like most brides,
she was highly pleased to find an opportunity of making a match.
"Ay! why not, love ? Surely they cannot live happy in what the
world calls single blessedness," replied the young king. As
bridegrooms sometimes are for a short time, he was very warm
upon the subject of matrimony.
Thereupon, without consulting the parties chiefly concerned in
their scheme, the master and mistress, after being comfortably
settled at the end of their journey, caused a large cage to be
brought, and put into it both their favourites.
Upon which Churaman the parrot leaned his head on one side and
directed a peculiar look at the jay. But Madan- manjari raised her
beak high in the air, puffed through it once or twice, and turned
away her face in extreme disdain.
"Perhaps," quoth the parrot, at length breaking silence, "you will
tell me that you have no desire to be married?"
"Probably," replied the jay.
"And why?" asked the male bird.
"Because I don't choose," replied the female.
"Truly a feminine form of resolution this," ejaculated the parrot. "I
will borrow my master's words and call it a woman's reason, that is
to say, no reason at all. Have you any objection to be more
explicit?"
"None whatever," retorted the jay, provoked by the rude innuendo
into telling more plainly than politely exactly what she thought;
"none whatever, sir parrot. You he-things are all of you sinful,
treacherous, deceitful, selfish, devoid of conscience, and
accustomed to sacrifice us, the weaker sex, to your smallest desire
or convenience."
"Of a truth, fair lady," quoth the young Raja Ram to his bride, "this
pet of thine is sufficiently impudent."
"Let her words be as wind in thine ear, master," interrupted the
parrot. "And pray, Mistress Jay, what are you she-things but
treacherous, false, ignorant, and avaricious beings, whose only
wish in this world is to prevent life being as pleasant as it might
be?"
"Verily, my love," said the beautiful Chandravati to her
bridegroom, "this thy bird has a habit of expressing his opinions in
a very free and easy way."
"I can prove what I assert," whispered the jay in the ear of the
princess.
"We can confound their feminine minds by an anecdote,"
whispered the parrot in the ear of the prince.
Briefly, King Vikram, it was settled between the twain that each
should establish the truth of what it had advanced by an illustration
in the form of a story.
Chandravati claimed, and soon obtained, precedence for the jay.
Then the wonderful bird, Madan-manjari, began to speak as
follows:-
I have often told thee, O queen, that before coming to thy feet, my
mistress was Ratnawati, the daughter of a rich trader, the dearest,
the sweetest, the --- 
Here the jay burst into tears, and the mistress was sympathetically
affected. Presently the speaker resumed--- 
However, I anticipate. In the city of Ilapur there was a wealthy
merchant, who was without offspring; on this account he was
continually fasting and going on pilgrimage, and when at home he
was ever engaged in reading the Puranas and in giving alms to the
Brahmans.
At length, by favour of the Deity, a son was born to this merchant,
who celebrated his birth with great pomp and rejoicing, and gave
large gifts to Brahmans and to bards, and distributed largely to the
hungry, the thirsty, and the poor. When the boy was five years old
he had him taught to read, and when older he was sent to a guru,
who had formerly himself been a student, and who was celebrated
as teacher and lecturer.
In the course of time the merchant's son grew up. Praise be to
Brahma! what a wonderful youth it was, with a face like a
monkey's, legs like a stork's, and a back like a camel's. You know
the old proverb:-- 
         Expect thirty-two villanies from the limping, and eighty
from the one-eyed man,
         But when the hunchback comes, say "Lord defend us!"
Instead of going to study, he went to gamble with other
ne'er-do-weels, to whom he talked loosely, and whom he taught to
be bad-hearted as himself. He made love to every woman, and
despite his ugliness, he was not unsuccessful. For they are equally
fortunate who are very handsome or very ugly, in so far as they are
both remarkable and remarked. But the latter bear away the palm.
Beautiful men begin well with women, who do all they can to
attract them, love them as the apples of their eyes, discover them to
be fools, hold them to be their equals, deceive them, and speedily
despise them. It is otherwise with the ugly man, who, in
consequence of his homeliness, must work his wits and take pains
with himself, and become as pleasing as he is capable of being, till
women forget his ape's face, bird's legs, and bunchy back.
The hunchback, moreover, became a Tantri, so as to complete his
villanies. He was duly initiated by an apostate Brahman, made a
declaration that he renounced all the ceremonies of his old
religion, and was delivered from their yoke, and proceeded to
perform in token of joy an abominable rite. In company with eight
men and eight women-a Brahman female, a dancing girl, a
weaver's daughter, a woman of ill fame, a washerwoman, a
barber's wife, a milkmaid, and the daughter of a land-owner-
choosing the darkest time of night and the most secret part of the
house, he drank with them, was sprinkled and anointed, and went
through many ignoble ceremonies, such as sitting nude upon a
dead body. The teacher informed him that he was not to indulge
shame, or aversion to anything, nor to prefer one thing to another,
nor to regard caste, ceremonial cleanness or uncleanness, but
freely to enjoy all the pleasures of sense-that is, of course, wine
and us, since we are the representatives of the wife of Cupid, and
wine prevents the senses from going astray. And whereas holy
men, holding that the subjugation or annihilation of the passions is
essential to final beatitude, accomplish this object by bodily
austerities, and by avoiding temptation, he proceeded to blunt the
edge of the passions with excessive indulgence. And he jeered at
the pious, reminding them that their ascetics are safe only in
forests, and while keeping a perpetual fast; but that he could
subdue his passions in the very presence of what they most
desired.
Presently this excellent youth's father died, leaving him immense
wealth. He blunted his passions so piously and so vigorously, that
in very few years his fortune was dissipated. Then he turned
towards his neighbour's goods and prospered for a time, till being
discovered robbing, he narrowly escaped the stake. At length he
exclaimed, "Let the gods perish! the rascals send me nothing but ill
luck!" and so saying he arose and fled from his own country.
Chance led that villain hunchback to the city of Chandrapur,
where, hearing the name of my master Hemgupt, he recollected
that one of his father's wealthiest correspondents was so called.
Thereupon, with his usual audacity, he presented himself at the
house, walked in, and although he was clothed in tatters,
introduced himself, told his father's name and circumstances, and
wept bitterly.
The good man was much astonished, and not less grieved, to see
the son of his old friend in such woful plight. He rose up, however,
embraced the youth, and asked the reason of his coming.
"I freighted a vessel," said the false hunchback, "for the purpose of
trading to a certain land. Having gone there, I disposed of my
merchandise, and, taking another cargo, I was on my voyage
home. Suddenly a great storm arose, and the vessel was wrecked,
and I escaped on a plank, and after a time arrived here. But I am
ashamed, since I have lost all my wealth, and I cannot show my
face in this plight in my own city. My excellent father would have
consoled me with his pity. But now that I have carried him and my
mother to Ganges,[FN#75] every one will turn against me; they
will rejoice in my misfortunes, they will accuse me of folly and
recklessness -  alas! alas! I am truly miserable."
My dear master was deceived by the cunning of the wretch. He
offered him hospitality, which was readily enough accepted, and
he entertained him for some time as a guest. Then, having reason
to be satisfied with his conduct, Hemgupt admitted him to his
secrets, and finally made him a partner in his business. Briefly, the
villain played his cards so well, that at last the merchant said to
himself:
"I have had for years an anxiety and a calamity in my house. My
neighbours whisper things to my disadvantage, and those who are
bolder speak out with astonishment amongst themselves, saying,
'At seven or eight, people marry their daughters, and this indeed is
the appointment of the law: that period is long since gone; she is
now thirteen or fourteen years old, and she is very tall and lusty,
resembling a married woman of thirty. How can her father eat his
rice with comfort and sleep with satisfaction, whilst such a
disreputable thing exists in his house? At present he is exposed to
shame, and his deceased friends are suffering through his retaining
a girl from marriage beyond the period which nature has
prescribed.' And now, while I am sitting quietly at home, the
Bhagwan (Deity) removes all my uneasiness: by his favour such an
opportunity occurs. It is not right to delay. It is best that I shall
give my daughter in marriage to him. Whatever can be done to-day
is best; who knows what may happen to-morrow?
"Thus thinking, the old man went to his wife and said to her,
"Birth, marriage, and death are all under the direction of the gods;
can anyone say when they will be ours? We want for our daughter
a young man who is of good birth, rich and handsome, clever and
honourable. But we do not find him. If the bridegroom be faulty,
thou sayest, all will go wrong. I cannot put a string round the neck
of our daughter and throw her into the ditch. If, however, thou
think well of the merchant's son, now my partner, we will celebrate
Ratnawati's marriage with him."
The wife, who had been won over by the hunchback's hypocrisy,
was also pleased, and replied, "My lord! when the Deity so plainly
indicates his wish, we should do it; since, though we have sat
quietly at home, the desire of our hearts is accomplished. It is best
that no delay be made: and, having quickly summoned the family
priest, and having fixed upon a propitious planetary conjunction,
that the marriage be celebrated."
Then they called their daughter -- ah, me! what a beautiful being
she was, and worthy the love of a Gandharva (demigod). Her long
hair, purple with the light of youth, was glossy as the
bramra's[FN#76] wing; her brow was pure and clear as the agate;
the ocean-coral looked pale beside her lips, and her teeth were as
two chaplets of pearls. Everything in her was formed to be loved.
Who could look into her eyes without wishing to do it again? Who
could hear her voice without hoping that such music would sound
once more? And she was good as she was fair. Her father adored
her; her mother, though a middle-aged woman, was not envious or
jealous of her; her relatives doted on her, and her friends could
find no fault with her. I should never end were I to tell her precious
qualities. Alas, alas ! my poor Ratnawati!
So saying, the jay wept abundant tears; then she resumed:
When her parents informed my mistress of their resolution, she
replied, "Sadhu-it is well!" She was not like most young women,
who hate nothing so much as a man whom their seniors order them
to love. She bowed her head and promised obedience, although, as
she afterwards told her mother, she could hardly look at her
intended, on account of his prodigious ugliness. But presently the
hunchback's wit surmounted her disgust. She was grateful to him
for his attention to her father and mother; she esteemed him for his
moral and religious conduct; she pitied him for his misfortunes,
and she finished with forgetting his face, legs, and back in her
admiration of what she supposed to be his mind.
She had vowed before marriage faithfully to perform all the duties
of a wife, however distasteful to her they might be; but after the
nuptials, which were not long deferred, she was not surprised to
find that she loved her husband. Not only did she omit to think of
his features and figure; I verily believe that she loved him the more
for his repulsiveness. Ugly, very ugly men prevail over women for
two reasons. Firstly, we begin with repugnance, which in the
course of nature turns to affection; and we all like the most that
which, when unaccustomed to it, we most disliked. Hence the poet
says, with as much truth as is in the male:
         Never despair, O man! when woman's spite
         Detests thy name and sickens at thy sight:
         Sometime her heart shall learn to love thee more
         For the wild hatred which it felt before, &c.
Secondly, the very ugly man appears, deceitfully enough, to think
little of his appearance, and he will give himself the trouble to
pursue a heart because he knows that the heart will not follow after
him. Moreover, we women (said the jay) are by nature pitiful, and
this our enemies term a "strange perversity." A widow is generally
disconsolate if she loses a little, wizen-faced, shrunken shanked,
ugly, spiteful, distempered thing that scolded her and quarrelled
with her, and beat her and made her hours bitter; whereas she will
follow her husband to Ganges with exemplary fortitude if he was
brave, handsome, generous --- 
"Either hold your tongue or go on with your story," cried the
warrior king, in whose mind these remarks awakened disagreeable
family reflections.
"Hi! hi! hi!" laughed the demon; "I will obey your majesty, and
make Madan-manjari, the misanthropical jay, proceed."
Yes, she loved the hunchback; and how wonderful is our love!
quoth the jay. A light from heaven which rains happiness on this
dull, dark earth! A spell falling upon the spirit, which reminds us
of a higher existence! A memory of bliss! A present delight! An
earnest of future felicity! It makes hideousness beautiful and
stupidity clever, old age young and wickedness good, moroseness
amiable, and low-mindedness magnanimous, perversity pretty and
vulgarity piquant. Truly it is sovereign alchemy and excellent flux
for blending contradictions is our love, exclaimed the jay.
And so saying, she cast a triumphant look at the parrot, who only
remarked that he could have desired a little more originality in her
remarks.
For some months (resumed Madan-manjari), the bride and the
bridegroom lived happily together in Hemgupt's house. But it is
said:
         Never yet did the tiger become a lamb;
and the hunchback felt that the edge of his passions again wanted
blunting. He reflected, "Wisdom is exemption from attachment,
and affection for children, wife, and home." Then he thus
addressed my poor young mistress:
"I have been now in thy country some years, and I have heard no
tidings of my own family, hence my mind is sad, I have told thee
everything about myself; thou must now ask thy mother leave for
me to go to my own city, and, if thou wishest, thou mayest go with
me."
Ratnawati lost no time in saying to her mother, "My husband
wishes to visit his own country; will you so arrange that he may
not be pained about this matter?"
The mother went to her husband, and said, "Your son-in-law
desires leave to go to his own country."
Hemgupt replied, " Very well; we will grant him leave. One has no
power over another man's son. We will do what he wishes."
The parents then called their daughter, and asked her to tell them
her real desire-whether she would go to her father-in-law's house,
or would remain in her mother's home. She was abashed at this
question, and could not answer; but she went back to her husband,
and said, "As my father and mother have declared that you should
do as you like, do not leave me behind."
Presently the merchant summoned his son-in-law, and having
bestowed great wealth upon him, allowed him to depart. He also
bade his daughter farewell, after giving her a palanquin and a
female slave. And the parents took leave of them with wailing and
bitter tears; their hearts were like to break. And so was mine.
For some days the hunchback travelled quietly along with his wife,
in deep thought. He could not take her to his city, where she would
find out his evil life, and the fraud which he had passed upon her
father. Besides which, although he wanted her money, he by no
means wanted her company for life. After turning on many
projects in his evil-begotten mind, he hit upon the following:
He dismissed the palanquin-bearers when halting at a little shed in
the thick jungle through which they were travelling, and said to his
wife, "This is a place of danger; give me thy jewels, and I will hide
them in my waist-shawl. When thou reachest the city thou canst
wear them again." She then gave up to him all her ornaments,
which were of great value. Thereupon he inveigled the slave girl
into the depths of the forest, where he murdered her, and left her
body to be devoured by wild beasts. Lastly, returning to my poor
mistress, he induced her to leave the hut with him, and pushed her
by force into a dry well, after which exploit he set out alone with
his ill-gotten wealth, walking towards his own city.
In the meantime, a wayfaring man, who was passing through that
jungle, hearing the sound of weeping, stood still, and began to say
to himself, "How came to my ears the voice of a mortal's grief in
this wild wood?" then followed the direction of the noise, which
led him a pit, and peeping over the side, he saw a woman crying at
the bottom. The traveller at once loosened his gird cloth, knotted it
to his turband, and letting down the line pulled out the poor bride.
He asked her who she was and how she came to fall into that well.
She replied, "I am the daughter of Hemgupt, the wealthiest
merchant in the city of Chandrapur; and I was journeying wit my
husband to his own country, when robbers set upon us and
surrounded us. They slew my slave girl, the threw me into a well,
and having bound my husband they took him away, together with
my jewels. I have no tidings of him, nor he of me." And so saying,
she burst into tears and lamentations.
The wayfaring man believed her tale, and conducted her to her
home, where she gave the same account of the accident which had
befallen her, ending with, "beyond this, I know not if they have
killed my husband, or have let him go." The father thus soothed
her grief "Daughter! have no anxiety; thy husband is alive, and by
the will of the Deity he will come to thee in a few days. Thieves
take men's money, not their lives." Then the parents presented her
with ornaments more precious than those which she had lost; and
summoning their relations and friends, they comforted her to the
best of their power.
And so did I. The wicked hunchback had, meanwhile, returned to
his own city, where he was excellently well received, because he
brought much wealth with him. His old associates flocked around
him rejoicing; and he fell into the same courses which had
beggared him before. Gambling and debauchery soon blunted his
passions, and emptied his purse. Again his boon companions,
finding him without a broken cowrie, drove him from their doors,
he stole and was flogged for theft; and lastly, half famished, he
fled the city. Then he said to himself, "I must go to my
father-in-law, and make the excuse that a grandson has been born
to him, and that I have come to offer him congratulations on the
event."
Imagine, however, his fears and astonishment, when, as he entered
the house, his wife stood before him. At first he thought it was a
ghost, and turned to run away, but she went out to him and said,
"Husband, be not troubled ! I have told my father that thieves came
upon us, and killed the slave girl and robbed me and threw me into
a well, and bound thee and carried thee off. Tell the same story,
and put away all anxious feelings. Come up and change thy
tattered garments-alas! some misfortune hath befallen thee. But
console thyself; all is now well, since thou art returned to me, and
fear not, for the house is shine, and I am thy slave."
The wretch, with all his hardness of heart, could scarcely refrain
from tears. He followed his wife to her room, where she washed
his feet, caused him to bathe, dressed him in new clothes, and
placed food before him. When her parents returned, she presented
him to their embrace, saying in a glad way, "Rejoice with me, O
my father and mother! the robbers have at length allowed him to
come back to us." Of course the parents were deceived, they are
mostly a purblind race; and Hemgupt, showing great favour to his
worthless son-in-law, exclaimed, "Remain with us, my son, and be
happy!"
For two or three months the hunchback lived quietly with his wife,
treating her kindly and even affectionately. But this did not last
long. He made acquaintance with a band of thieves, and arranged
his plans with them.
After a time, his wife one night came to sleep by his side, having
put on all her jewels. At midnight, when he saw that she was fast
asleep, he struck her with a knife so that she died. Then he
admitted his accomplices, who savagely murdered Hemgupt and
his wife; and with their assistance he carried off any valuable
article upon which he could lay his hands. The ferocious wretch!
As he passed my cage he looked at it, and thought whether he had
time to wring my neck. The barking of a dog saved my life; but my
mistress, my poor Ratnawati-ah, me! ah, me!-- 
"Queen," said the jay, in deepest grief, "all this have I seen with
mine own eyes, and have heard with mine own ears. It affected me
in early life, and gave me a dislike for the society of the other sex.
With due respect to you, I have resolved to remain an old maid.
Let your majesty reflect, what crime had my poor mistress
committed? A male is of the same disposition as a highway robber;
and she who forms friendship with such an one, cradles upon her
bosom a black and venomous snake."
"Sir Parrot," said the jay, turning to her wooer, "I have spoken. I
have nothing more to say, but that you he-things are all a
treacherous, selfish, wicked race, created for the express purpose
of working our worldly woe, and--"
"When a female, O my king, asserts that she has nothing more to
say, but," broke in Churaman, the parrot with a loud dogmatical
voice, "I know that what she has said merely whets her tongue for
what she is about to say. This person has surely spoken long
enough and drearily enough."
"Tell me, then, O parrot," said the king, "what faults there may be
in the other sex."
"I will relate," quoth Churaman, "an occurrence which in my early
youth determined me to live and to die an old bachelor."
When quite a young bird, and before my schooling began, I was
caught in the land of Malaya, and was sold to a very rich merchant
called Sagardati, a widower with one daughter, the lady Jayashri.
As her father spent all his days and half his nights in his
counting-house, conning his ledgers and scolding his writers, that
young woman had more liberty than is generally allowed to those
of her age, and a mighty bad use she made of it.
O king! men commit two capital mistakes in rearing the "domestic
calamity," and these are over-vigilance and under-vigilance. Some
parents never lose sight of their daughters, suspect them of all evil
intentions, and are silly enough to show their suspicions, which is
an incentive to evil-doing. For the weak-
=========
An account of the dreadful Accident and great loss of lives which occurred at Kirkcaldy, on Sunday the 15th June, 1828 - Wikisource, the free online library
An account of the dreadful Accident and great loss of lives which occurred at Kirkcaldy, on Sunday the 15th June, 1828 - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
An account of the dreadful Accident and great loss of lives which occurred at Kirkcaldy, on Sunday the 15th June, 1828
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
An account of the dreadful Accident and great loss of lives which occurred at Kirkcaldy, on Sunday the 15th June, 1828  (1828)  
3148955An account of the dreadful Accident and great loss of lives which occurred at Kirkcaldy, on Sunday the 15th June, 18281828
​CHEAP TRACTS, NO. 8.
(Second Edition.)
AN ACCOUNT OF
THE
DREADFUL ACCIDENT
AND
GREAT LOSS OF LIVES
WHICH OCCURRED AT KIRKCALDY,
On Sunday the 15th June, 1828,
By which upwards of twenty-eight persons lost their lives, and many were severely injured.
DUNFERMLINE:
PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOHN MILLER.
———
1828. ​Dreadful Accident,
Sunday, 15th June. 1828.
———
Since the fatal accident which took place in the New Church, Kilmarnock, about five and twenty years ago, when upwards of a score of individuals lost their lives by the falling of a staircase, and the rush which it occasioned, no event of a similar description, and attended with results equally calamitous, has occurred in this country until the fatal catastrophe of Sunday last at Kirkcaldy. This disaster, however, far transcends every thing of the kind that has yet happened in any place of worship in Scotland; and whether we consider the occasion on which it befel the hapless victims, the sudden and immediate destruction of life of which it was productive, or the still more dreadful and appalling devastation which might have ensued, there can be no doubt that it ought to be regarded, and will long be remembered, as one of the most awful dispensations of Providence, and at the same time one of the most impressive and memorable examples ​the precarious and uncertain tenure of human existence. The principal facts, which have been (illegible text)xiously and industriously collected upon the (illegible text)ot, may be very shortly told.
Being the Communion Sabbath in Kirkcaldy, the parish church, as generally happens on such occasions, was fuller than ordinary throughout the early part of the day; and it being understood that the Rev. Edward Irving, of the Caledonian Chapel, London, the son-in-law of the clergyman and formerly a resident in Kirkcaldy, was to perform the evening service, a great additional crowd, impelled by curiosity or other motives, flocked to hear that celebrated person. The consequence was, that after the doors were opened, and the bell had rung for about ten minutes, every part of the church was filled, and numbers (illegible text)ere standing in the passages; but it was not "crowded to suffocation," as has been erroneously stated. At this moment, however,—that is about two or three minutes before the service was to commence, and close upon six o’clock,—the (illegible text)ole of the north-western range of galleries, (illegible text)the right side of the pulpit, extending to ra(illegible text) more than fifty feet in length, yielded to (illegible text) unusual pressure of the multitude it supported, and fell, with a tremendous crash, upon the (illegible text) more hapless assemblage underneath. The (illegible text) indication of the catastrophe was given by (illegible text) Spear’s gallery, which is the centre division (illegible text)he range; and a gentleman who occupied it, (illegible text)just remarked that he felt the gallery sinking, when, instantly, the whole mass was precipitated ​downwards with a tremendous crash; those persons in the front having been thrown backwards, and those behind forwards, so that by far the greater number fell head-foremost, amongst the rafters, beams, and rubbish into that part of the church which is immediately below. At this moment the scene was indescribably terrific and appalling. A dense cloud of dust instantly arose, and for a few seconds enveloped those who were overwhelmed amidst the wreck in its suffocating volume. Shrieks, screams, groans, and exclamations of all sorts, intermingled with the voices of individuals calling aloud for help, or attempting to allay the consternation, and counsel the multitude against rushing suddenly to the doors, now rose in most heart-rending dissonance. But the dreadful panic was not to be stayed. On the contrary, the multitude, impressed with a momentary conviction that the whole range of galleries which sweep round the church would tumble down, made a simultaneous rush to the doors, tearing up and breaking down every thing, which obstructed their progress.
The fatal consequences which have ensued from this accident were not so much occasioned by the accident itself as by the terror which seized on the people when they beheld the fall of the galleries. According to the most accurate estimate, there were in the galleries that gave way upwards of 250 people, including those who were in the passages, and about an equal number underneath, there being in this ​manner about 500 persons exposed to the immediate consequences of the accident. Those who were in these galleries escaped generally with bruises and contusions more or less severe; and of those who were under them, only three persons, Mrs Beveridge and two others, as far as we can learn, actually lost their lives by the fall of the joists above them. The former was killed on the spot, while two blind boys, her twin sons, who were seated beside her, escaped unhurt. It was stated that she was in the act of leaning forward when one of the joists fell, and rested on her neck, which was pressed on the other side against the top of a pew.
The casualties would in this manner have been comparatively few, if the rest of the  congregation had retained sufficient presence of mind to have remained for a little time in their seats. But this in a mixed multitude of men, women, and children, having along with them, in many cases, their nearest relatives, for whom they were even more anxious than for themselves, was hardly to be expected; and, accordingly, as soon as the crash took place, they rushed, as we have already noticed, in the wildest consternation to the doors, and through the windows, and many were suffocated or trampled to death, particularly at the bottom of the gallery stairs, and in the vestibule, where there was a pressure from three opposite points, namely, the two gallery stairs, and the body of the church. The perils of this dreadful struggle for life were perhaps increased by another circumstance, which ​was, that the friends of individuals, fathers and mothers who had children, or aged and helpless relatives in the church, some of whom were known to have fallen down, made anxious exertions for their safety, by endeavouring, though in vain, to stem the human torrent that was rolling over them. The temporary stoppages which these fruitless efforts occasioned, only rendered the multitude behind more desperate, and more determined to force their way out, and their power was resistless—most of those who fell, fell to rise no more.
Many escaped through the windows, which are nearly all broken; and from those on the gallery stairs, which were broken open by the beadle from the outside, part of the crowd rolled out, and were dragged from beneath to prevent others falling above them. Here also several accidents took place, some of them severe. It is remarkable, that many, who have escaped with no injury, have no recollection whatever of what took place, or how they escaped. It would seem, that the terrors of the scene had for a time estranged their mental faculties; several were taken away actually deranged, and many still labour under a disturbed nervous excitement, which will take some time to subside.
Such persons as had sufficient fortitude to remain in their pews escaped unhurt. Several who were under the gallery when it fell, prostrated themselves in the pews, and also sustained no injury.—Many reached the open air in a state approaching to nakedness their clothes being literally torn off them.
 ​When the tumult had in some measure subsided, and the bodies of the dead and dying had been brought out and laid upon the greensward of the graves at the north-west angle of the church, a scene of a more mournful, and still more withering description ensued. Such a number of human beings, some in the first blush of life, the greater proportion in the prime and vigour of their years, hurried in one moment of wild strife and agony into eternity, was of itself sufficient to shake the firmest nerves, and to appal the stoutest heart. But there  were many accessory circumstances calculated, if possible, to make a still deeper impression, and to strain the chords of feeling to the very highest pitch. There, at that moment of unspeakable horror, might be seen parents suddenly bereft of children, children deprived of their parents, brothers bending over the dead bodies of their sisters, and sisters over those of their brothers, the lonely widow gazing in speechless agony at the inanimate frames of those she best loved, and who formed her sole comfort and stay, with crowds of relatives, and persons of all classes, either bewailing a loss, or awaiting in dreadful suspense the announcement of some bereavement; while the anxious and too often unavailing efforts of the surgeons, surrounded as they were with every form and manifestation of grief in all its bitterness, and with the dissonant but heart-rending cries of parental, filial, or fraternal lamentation, formed altogether a picture of deep and real tragedy such as it is more easy to ​imagine than pourtray. On the hearts and minds of those who witnessed it, it is written in characters never to be effaced; and it is impossible to listen to their simple and affecting descriptions without the strongest emotion. The extent of the loss actually sustained, however, may now be considered as pretty accurately determined.
The number of killed in all amounted to twenty-eight; and some of these were attended with circumstances peculiarly affecting:-Three young women of the name of Mathewson, and a cousin whom they had with them, were all buried in one grave.—They were the sole support of their mother, who is left in very destitute circumstances. So dreadfully was she overwhelmed by this unexpected and heavy calamity, that fear was entertained for her life. A young lady, a stranger, had in the first moment of alarm effected her escape, but returned in search of her mother, and perished.
Besides those who were either killed on the spot or died soon afterwards, about 150 persons have more or less suffered from the injuries they received on this melancholy occasion; and many persons were confined to bed on Tuesday and yesterday who had been walking about all Monday. It is a remarkable circumstance, that so few of those injuries are of a serious nature, but some of them threaten to prove fatal. There are only two cases of fracture, one of the collar-bone, and the other of the neck of the thigh-bone, but the patients, both ​women, are doing well. This must excite the astonishment of everyone who examines the appearances which the church still presents. In the desperate struggle to get out many of the doors of the pews have been broken, book-boards have been torn up, and wherever there was any corner or projection which could be seized hold of, it is torn down. The pressure, indeed, appears to have been so enormous in many parts, that it overthrew every thing which came in its way; and all those who were caught in its vortex had their clothes more or less torn, while some reached the open air almost in a state of nakedness. Fragments, chiefly of female dress, as bits of silk, broken combs, and ether small articles, were scattered about the church, even on Tuesday, after every thing of value had been removed—and sufficiently attested the nature and extent of the death struggle which had taken place. Besides, a considerable number of persons escaped, or rather was forced out, through the windows, particularly that of the staircase leading to the south gallery; and as the descent in all cases were several feet in height, and the violence with which they were ejected extreme, the fewness of fracture is truly astonishing. One man, indeed, was less fortunate. Standing in the southern gallery, immediately after the crash, and as if fascinated by the horror of the scene before him, he leaped through a window down into the area, and fell prostrate, but he immediately recovered himself, and springing to his feet, as if wholly unhurt, ​uttered some inarticulate expression, and then instantly dropped down and expired. Several persons succeeded in getting out of this gallery by the window immediately to the left of that now mentioned, and descending on the top of a small portico a little below the sill, reached the area of the church-yard without injury.
A variety of remarkable and some almost miraculous escapes were mentioned to us, Mr ———, surgeon, Kirkcaldy, was in the body of the church when the gallery fell; but his family and his sister-in-law, were in the gallery at the moment of the crash, and for a time literally buried in the ruins; yet most fortunately they escaped unharmed from their perilous situation. The family of Dr ——— was in nearly the same terrible plight, and had equal good fortune. Mr ———, innkeeper, and his daughters, were also involved amidst the rafters and rubbish, yet escaped with a few trifling bruises. The front work of the gallery, after yielding a little outwards before the crash, having remained standing, thirty-six individuals clung to it, and were saved. Several persons were observed to seize hold of and suspend themselves from the chandeliers, by which means they escaped being entangled in the rush, and were thus preserved. A little girl, daughter of Mr ———, effected her escape by a union of agility and presence of mind which we heard warmly eulogised by several who had witnessed it; and various other instances of a similar kind were stated to us. Amongst the numbers who were trodden down ​at the bottom of the fatal stair-case, we have only heard of one man who has survived. By the pressure and the suffocating heat and dust, this person was rendered insensible; but when extricated, and removed to the open air, he recovered a little, then vomited freely, and is now out of all danger. It is remarkable, too, that those persons who were in the gallery which fell, generally escaped with bruises and contusions more or less severe; and those who had the firmness and presence of mind to keep their seats were nearly all, we believe, equally fortunate. In fact, this was their only, or at all events their best chance of safety; but, unhappily, a multitude, under the influence of the wildest consternation, is insensible to every motive or feeling except the panic by which it is actuated, and rushes blindly into the jaws of the very destruction which the brute impulse of fear impels it to shun. In this case the rush was rendered still more tremendous, and the mortality increased, by the friends of individuals who had fallen, trying to stem the human torrent that was rolling over them. After each momentary stoppage, it burst forth anew with resistless fury, and the generous efforts to save only added to the number of victims.
Such is a faint and imperfect account of this truly deplorable calamity, which has plunged Kirkcaldy and its neighbourhood into mourning, and excited a strong sensation wherever the news of it has reached. To ascribe it, however, to the crowd which had assembled upon this ​occasion would be equally erroneous and unjust. The real cause was the utter insufficiency of the church, particularly the galleries, as will incontestably appear from the following  particulars. This edifice, which is modern, was built in 1807, twenty-one years ago. The contractor was a person named Alexander Macfarlane, a wright from Perth; and amongst other things, it was one of the specifications of his contract that the transverse joists or beams of the gallery should be inserted into the walls while building. Accordingly, when the latter had attained the requisite height, he applied for the timbers to a wood merchant in Kirkcaldy, but being unable to give security for the payment of the price, they were refused; and the church was built and roofed in, in direct violation of this part of his compact, and without any means having been provided in the shape of a wall-plate or otherwise, either for the insertion or support of these all-important beams. Hence, when they were procured, they appear to have been rather laid against the wall than inserted in it, the holes in which the extremities were placed were scarcely an inch deep; and, in some cases, it is evident they have been found too short for this, as we observed several joists which had not reached the wall at all, and were attached to it solely by a thin narrow plate of iron with a few nails. Nor is this even all. The lower extremities of these transverse beams or joists rested upon a longitudinal beam, supported by pillars, which runs along the front of the gallery; ​but here the same reckless rapacity, or rather spirit of culpable homicide by anticipation, has been at work. The grooves or notches in the longitudinal beam for receiving the lower extremities of the cross beams are only an inch deep at the upper part, and scarcely a quarter of an inch at the lower; so that if the front of the gallery had by any accident been deflected half an inch from the perpendicular, the destruction of the whole was inevitable. When the church was "finished," as it was called, this Macfarlane had become bankrupt, and the litigation, we believe, took place between his creditors and the heritors of the parish as to its sufficiency; the consequence of which was, that the whole was referred to a builder, who, confining his examination to the mason-work, reported it as  sufficient; but the heritors never, we understand, received any report as to the sufficiency of the carpenters’ and joiners’ work; and it is notorious that the galleries have all along been considered insecure and dangerous. So very general was this apprehension some years ago, that it was found necessary to put in two additional pillars immediately behind those at the extremities of the semicircle facing the pulpit; and had it not been for this slight precaution, the whole would unquestionably have tumbled down on Sunday last, and buried hundreds more in its ruins. As it is, the whole of the southern gallery is damaged; the transverse beams have evidently been drawn by the shock from their shallow sockets; the lath and plaster are broken; ​and the whole ready to fall with the slightest concussion. Nay more, we have not a shadow of  doubt in our mind, that had the congregation on Sunday been fairly assembled before the accident of the west gallery took place, the concussion usually produced by the rising of the multitude to prayer, would have occasioned the downfal of the entire range, and led to a calamity incomparably more dreadful than even that which has actually occurred.
The following measurements and calculations will perhaps serve to give our readers a clearer idea of the nature and extent of the accident than any description, however minute. The galleries swept round three sides of the church, which is in form a parallelogram. The portion immediately in front of the pulpit, which stands at the northern end or gable, is a semicircle, from the extremities of which two sides, each about fifty or fifty-one feet in length, run longitudinally in a parallel direction along the whole church. The average horizontal breadth of each of those sides is about sixteen feet, and they are raised at an angle of from 80 to 88 degrees. The one which gave way on Sunday last was that on the right hand of the pulpit, which is towards the west; and from the side which still remains we find that it must have contained 21 seats in all, each fitted to hold eight persons with perfect ease and comfort. But as the church was crowded, let us suppose that there were ten persons in each seat, and forty standing in the passages. This we know to be ​a moderate computation ; and it gives 250 individuals in the part of the gallery which fell. At a low calculation there must have been fully an equal number immediately underneath; so that, at the moment of the catastrophe, probably more than 500 human beings were buried in the ruin and havoc with which the rapacity of a needy or unprincipled contractor, and the unaccountable negligence of the legal conservators of the edifice are alone chargeable. From the appearances presented by the wreck it seems evident that the immediate cause of the accident was the yielding of the longitudinal beam into which the lower extremities of the joists were so slightly inserted ; in consequence of which they slipped out of the sockets, and the whole came down, with the exception of this beam and the front work attached to it, which seems to have instantly after recovered its vertical position. The church was originally calculated to contain 1600, and it is supposed that upwards of 1800 persons were within its walls at the time when the catastrophe took place.
The panic and consternation which prevailed in Kirkcaldy when the lamentable news first spread is indescribable; and the town continued in a state of great agitation throughout the whole of Monday. In the course of that day the Council Chamber was crowded with people claiming hats, shawls, trinkets, bibles, and other articles which had been lost in the tumult; and the Provost with a number of other gentlemen, were indefatigable in their endeavours to satisfy ​the numerous claimants. Immediately after the disaster the special constables were called out, and continuing on duty throughout the whole of Monday, Tuesday, and part of yesterday, these gentlemen have been of the greatest use in preserving and effecting the restoration of property.
The exertions of Drs Johnston and Chalmers to give medical assistance to the unfortunate sufferers was beyond all praise. They bled numbers in the church-yard, and throughout the whole night went from house to house, giving that relief and advice which their eminent talents so well enabled them to afford.
On Tuesday evening the scene changed to one of a more mournful character. On that day we witnessed no less than ten funerals in Kirkcaldy; and in one of these four bodies, being those of the Mathewsons and their cousin Ann Smith, were at once conveyed to the church-yard, and deposited in the same grave. One uninformed of the cause might have taken this town for a "city of the plague," and supposed that the frequent sombre processions which met him at every turn, were escorting the victims of an unsparing pestilence to their last resting-place. All these funerals, though of persons in the lower ranks of life, were attended spontaneously and uninvited by the venerable Provost and all the respectable people of the place. While standing in the church-yard, looking at the interment of one of the corpses, we were much affected with the simple appeal made ​by an old man to the persons who had escorted it to the burying-ground:—"Any of you,  gentlemen, who are disengaged will be so good as go down and help to bring up Thomas Watson's wife.”
Mr Irving was desirious to preach, on Monday night, in the church-yard, and was only dissuaded from so doing by the remonstrances of the very respectable Provost of the burgh. On Tuesday he was also desirious to preach in the church-yard, or in an adjoining park, but was prevented by the state of the weather from such an exhibition, which was in every respect uncalled for, and entirely at variance with the feelings of the people. We may add, however, that Mr Irving was extremely active in rendering assistance when the accident happened; and that he has been equally humane and liberal in visiting, and rendering pecuniary assistance when it was required.
At a meeting, which was numerously and respectably attended, the situation of the surviving relations of some of the unfortunate sufferers was taken into consideration; and a committee, consisting of the Magistrates and three other gentlemen, was appointed to afford what  pecuniary or other relief they might judge necessary. A subscription for this purpose has been opened; and so far as distress can in this way be alleviated, we hope it will be liberally administered.
​
Sunday after the Accident.
The tragic scene that occurred last Sunday in this town has excited an interest unparalleled in its annals. This day week all were in high spirits, expecting to hear one of the theological stars of the age. How quickly was the spirit of the dream changed into mourning. Some who were in the bouyancy of youthful spirits, were, in the short space of a few minutes, extended cold and lifeless on the ground; the mother was heard wailing her lost child, the widow her husband, and the friend was seen clinging to the inanimate body of him that was dear  to him as a brother, refusing to be separated, for he could not believe the extent of his loss. Seven have since died, but we can now state that all the injured are in a fair way of recovery; and must add, that it is now matter of surprise that the calamity did not prove much greater than it really was. 
An architect has since surveyed the south gallery, and was astonished to finds some of the joists altogether off the great beam,—having no other support to prevent their fall than the nails that attached them to the floor above. Farther, he observed that the pillars which support the beam of what was the north gallery, are not placed in its centre, but towards the outer angle.
This day Mr Martin preached in the forenoon from a tent, to a considerable audience assembled in a ​small park adjoining the church-yard; and there was a sermon in the evening at Abbotshall. The object of this arrangement was, that, as some might be unwilling or unable to attend divine worship in the open air, all might be accommodated; Mr Martin took for his text the words in Luke, xii.—40 "Be ye therefore ready also." The other clergymen of the town also embraced the occasion to dwell on the uncertain tenure of human life, and the mysterious dispensations of Providence. One chose as the subject of his discourse, "Shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord hath not done it;" and another, the fall of the tower of Siloam.
The number of new-made graves in the church-yard was an impressive spectacle. This spot is invested with a deep and melancholy interest, and the large mound raised above the sisters Mathewsons, arrests the attention of all. Here may be seen nearly twenty "brown hillocks" where last Sunday grew the green sward. The awful stilness of the scene is an eloquent picture of death, and the frailty of man ; and cold indeed must be the heart that can withstand its monitory impulses. The most of the people appeared in mourning ; a solemnity was marked in almost every face; an awe, as if all were sensible that some dire convulsion had bereaved them of some of their dearest relatives. It may be worthy of notice, that several, particularly females, who were carried home in a state of stupor, on coming to their senses, had not the slightest recollection of the tragic scene in which they had been sharers.
​
Farther Particulars.
One of the first persons who discovered the danger was Mr Edward Sang. He sat immediately under the longitudinal beam of the gallery and a small quantity of dust falling upon him, which was followed by particles of lime, he looked up, and observing the whole mass of the floor coming down, as it were in a body, he made a desperate spring forward, and alighted in a passage through which the minister enters from the vestry to the pulpit. By the time he had reached this spot the whole had fallen.—A little boy, about eight years of age, made a singular escape. His mother was crushed against the wall, but still held him in her hand. In the confusion, she lost her hold of him, and naturally supposed he had perished. But when one of the bodies was drawn out, the boy was found unhurt, and rolled up in a mantle attached to the corpse. —One individual, who lost a daughter, had his whole family with him in his seat, which was in the centre of the church, and he had the presence of mind to remain till the confusion was over. He endeavoured to calm the alarm of his family, and to keep them together; but when he reached the door the first object he beheld was the corpse of his daughter stretched on a tombstone. —Another, a tall and powerful man, with a boy by his side, at the request of some others, pushed forward to pull open the bolts of the south door, and returning in search of his son, found him on the floor trampled to death by the very persons in whose behalf he had so generously ​exerted himself. His appearance when he saw what had befallen his son is said to have been beyond description heart-rending.—Sarah Penman who was before peculiarly unfortunate, having lost her husband and son both by violent deaths within two years, was in church with her son, an infirm lad. She was seen in the utmost agony crying "My puir object, my puir laddie," and to rush into the densest part of the crowd to assist him. He escaped with trifling injury, but the unfortunate mother was trampled to death and so dreadfully mangled as only to he recognised by the colour of her gown. The same was the condition of many of the other bodies; and many bore no marks at all of external violence. One woman, had merely a mark on her breast, as if it had been pressed by a heavy iron shod shoe.
The following lines, occasioned by this dreadful catastrophe, are the effusion of a pious and amiable heart, and exhibit poetical powers of no common rate.
But yesterday,
On such a Sabbath, holy, cool, serene,
A Christian flock had met, with pious hearts,
To feast as the disciples of their Saviour,
And eat of the Last Supper, which to many
Was in sad truth the last; and they were fill’d
With holy things, and praised their glorious God; 
And ere the sun should set, they came once more
The sacred words of life to hear, and strengthen
The vows of virtue which their hearts had paid.
Sure, they were ripe in faith and strong in hope, ​And every taint of earth had vanished
As their renewed souls drew near to God ?
And kindred faces sat in love together,
Beaming affection ; brother smiled on sister,
Mother on son, and father on his daughter,
What looks of holiness, that seem’d to say,
Are we not truly blest?—and some, perchance.
Look’d wistfully towards that happy time
When old and young, in their appointed season,
Together gather'd by the reaper, Death,
Should live for ever in the light of Heaven,
Of which this earthly foretaste was so sweet;
And their full hearts, perchance, were warmly breathing,—
"How pleasant are thy tabernacles, Lord!
With mercy’s oil my head thou hast anointed;
My cup o’erflows even in the wilderness;
Yea, though I wander through the dreary vale
Of death’s dark shadow, I will fear no evil;—
For thou, oh Lord, art with me, and thy rod
And staff they comfort me.—Yea all my life,
Goodness and mercy, sure, shall follow me.
And I shall dwell within the House of God
For evermore.”
⁠Hark, whence arose that shriek
Of agony! that fearful, dreadful crash!
That hum of many voices in despair!
How stream the people from the fated temple,
With looks of horror,—wildly—wildly gazing!
Ye who desired to be with God, are there!
His house was your last earthly dwelling-place;
His mercy, your last meal ; his sacred blood,
Your latest cup; the cup of death, the gate ​Of life beyond the grave; your last support,
His staff; his rod of chastisement, salvation!
⁠No pang was yours; death came untold, undream’d,
At once, and ye are sleeping.—Shall we mourn?
Were not ye ripe for death?—Ah, ye have gained
A blessed lot! to sup in Paradise!
Not yours to see those whom ye loved on earth
Torn from your arms by withering decay;
To feel the bursting heart, when broke the tie
That bound you to the dead,—No, ye are not
in death divided,—brother died with sister,
Mother with son, and father with his daughter,
Together did your hearts aspire to Heav’n;
Together are your souls before your God!
⁠Sleep peacefully; ye blessed martyrs, sleep;
And wake in blessedness. Your earthly garment,
Already, in your feast of love, thrown off,
When faith was pointing out the way to Heaven,
is dropt for ever. How was recompensed
That little moment of untold of horror,
When death appeared so dreadful!— sure you oped
Your eyes upon the eternal throne of God,
And saw your heavenly Saviour smile upon you,
And bid you welcome to his Father’s house!
⁠Oh God! that it were mine, thus blest to die
Ripe for the sickle, with the friends I love,
Seal’d as thy servant at thy holy table,
Then snatch’d away to Heaven! Alfred.
 ​
The following are the Names of the
Unfortunate Sufferers.
Martha Mathewson, aged 28, Jean Mathewson, aged 24, and Isabella Mathewson, aged 22,
mill-spinners, Kirkcaldy. 
Agnes Smith, mill-spinner, Kirkcaldy,
Mrs Beveridge, Kirkcaldy.
Grace Cunningham, ditto.
Mary Anderson, ditto, aged 16 or 17
Thomas Miller, ditto, aged 13.
Janet Cunningham, servant, ditto.
Peter Nicol, ditto, aged 8.
Janet Currer, servant, ditto
Henrietta Brown, spinster, ditto.
Nancy Johnstone, residing at Pathhead.
Janet Stenhouse, Westbridge.
Wemyss Murray, Newton, Abbotshall
Mrs Watson, Kirkcaldy,
Sarah Penman, poultry keeper at Dunnikier,
Elizabeth Irvine, servant, at Glentarkie
David Lawson, weaver, Park, Kirkcaldy.
Robert M‘Caul. weaver, ditto aged 19.
John Hepburn, shoe-maker, Links
John Barron, flax-dresser, Abbotshall.
John Brown, weaver, Pathhead.
James Oswald, sen. father-in-law to the preceding. 
Alex. M‘Dougall, a boy belonging to Kinghorn.
Miss Wingate, from Glasgow.
Mathew Brodie, weaver, Links.
Jas. Grant, tailor, Pathhead, died Tuesday after.
And since that time seven more, whose names we have not ascertained, have died of the injuries they had received.
Authority control
 English Wikisource: 3148955
This work was published before January 1, 1927, and is in the public domain worldwide because the author died at least 100 years ago.
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1435
Cached time: 20221017211907
Cache expiry: 86400
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.184 seconds
Real time usage: 0.335 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1668/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 74337/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 30586/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 0/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 55219/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.051/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1707734/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  318.092      1 -total
 14.87%   47.314      1 Template:Authority_control
 13.21%   42.028      1 Template:Header
  5.40%   17.192      1 Page:Account_of_the_dreadful_accident_and_great_loss_of_lives_which_occurred_at_Kirkcaldy,_on_Sunday_the_15th_June,_1828.pdf/21
  5.18%   16.492      1 Page:Account_of_the_dreadful_accident_and_great_loss_of_lives_which_occurred_at_Kirkcaldy,_on_Sunday_the_15th_June,_1828.pdf/19
  4.92%   15.663      1 Page:Account_of_the_dreadful_accident_and_great_loss_of_lives_which_occurred_at_Kirkcaldy,_on_Sunday_the_15th_June,_1828.pdf/9
  4.68%   14.892      1 Page:Account_of_the_dreadful_accident_and_great_loss_of_lives_which_occurred_at_Kirkcaldy,_on_Sunday_the_15th_June,_1828.pdf/12
  4.66%   14.831      1 Page:Account_of_the_dreadful_accident_and_great_loss_of_lives_which_occurred_at_Kirkcaldy,_on_Sunday_the_15th_June,_1828.pdf/1
  3.68%   11.698      4 Template:Center
  3.46%   11.016      1 Template:Block_center/s
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:3148955-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211907 and revision id 10695154.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=An_account_of_the_dreadful_Accident_and_great_loss_of_lives_which_occurred_at_Kirkcaldy,_on_Sunday_the_15th_June,_1828&oldid=10695154"
Categories: Pages with illegible text1828 worksPamphletsNon-fictionScotlandPD-oldHidden category: Works using categories parameter
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageSourceDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this page
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 6 December 2020, at 08:02.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Haile Selassie's address to the United Nations, 1963 - Wikisource, the free online library
Haile Selassie's address to the United Nations, 1963 - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Haile Selassie's address to the United Nations, 1963
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Selassie's Address to the United Nations  (1963)  by Haile Selassieinformation about this edition. related portals: United Nations.sister projects: Wikidata item.
Spoken to the United Nations General Assembly on October 4, 1963. This speech was the inspiration for Bob Marley's hit song "War". The translation is that provided by the United Nations, running concurrent with his speech.
135403Selassie's Address to the United Nations1963Haile Selassie
Twenty-seven years ago, as Emperor of Ethiopia, I mounted the rostrum in Geneva, Switzerland, to address the League of Nations and to appeal for relief from the destruction which had been unleashed against my defenseless nation, by the Fascist invader. I spoke then both to and for the conscience of the world. My words went unheeded, but history testifies to the accuracy of the warning that I gave in 1936.
Today, I stand before the world organization which has succeeded to the mantle discarded by its discredited predecessor. In this body is enshrined the principle of collective security which I unsuccessfully invoked at Geneva. Here, in this Assembly, reposes the best - perhaps the last - hope for the peaceful survival of mankind.
In 1936, I declared that it was not the Covenant of the League that was at stake, but international morality. Undertakings, I said then, are of little worth if the will to keep them is lacking. The Charter of the United Nations expresses the noblest aspirations of man: abjuration of force in the settlement of disputes between states; the assurance of human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion; the safeguarding of international peace and security.
But these, too, as were the phrases of the Covenant, are only words; their value depends wholly on our will to observe and honor them and give them content and meaning. The preservation of peace and the guaranteeing of man's basic freedoms and rights require courage and eternal vigilance: courage to speak and act - and if necessary, to suffer and die - for truth and justice; eternal vigilance, that the least transgression of international morality shall not go undetected and unremedied. These lessons must be learned anew by each succeeding generation, and that generation is fortunate indeed which learns from other than its own bitter experience. This Organization and each of its members bear a crushing and awesome responsibility: to absorb the wisdom of history and to apply it to the problems of the present, in order that future generations may be born, and live, and die, in peace.
The record of the United Nations during the few short years of its life affords mankind a solid basis for encouragement and hope for the future. The United Nations has dared to act, when the League dared not in Palestine, in Korea, in Suez, in the Congo. There is not one among us today who does not conjecture upon the reaction of this body when motives and actions are called into question. The opinion of this Organization today acts as a powerful influence upon the decisions of its members. The spotlight of world opinion, focused by the United Nations upon the transgressions of the renegades of human society, has thus far proved an effective safeguard against unchecked aggression and unrestricted violation of human rights.
The United Nations continues to serve as the forum where nations whose interests clash may lay their cases before world opinion. It still provides the essential escape valve without which the slow build-up of pressures would have long since resulted in catastrophic explosion. Its actions and decisions have speeded the achievement of freedom by many peoples on the continents of Africa and Asia. Its efforts have contributed to the advancement of the standard of living of peoples in all corners of the world.
For this, all men must give thanks. As I stand here today, how faint, how remote are the memories of 1936. How different in 1963 are the attitudes of men. We then existed in an atmosphere of suffocating pessimism. Today, cautious yet buoyant optimism is the prevailing spirit.
But each one of us here knows that what has been accomplished is not enough. The United Nations judgments have been and continue to be subject to frustration, as individual member-states have ignored its pronouncements and disregarded its recommendations. The Organization's sinews have been weakened, as member-states have shirked their obligations to it. The authority of the Organization has been mocked, as individual member-states have proceeded, in violation of its commands, to pursue their own aims and ends. The troubles which continue to plague us virtually all arise among member states of the Organization, but the Organization remains impotent to enforce acceptable solutions. As the maker and enforcer of the international law, what the United Nations has achieved still falls regrettably short of our goal of an international community of nations.
This does not mean that the United Nations has failed. I have lived too long to cherish many illusions about the essential high mindedness of men when brought into stark confrontation with the issue of control over their security, and their property interests. Not even now, when so much is at hazard would many nations willingly entrust their destinies to other hands.
Yet, this is the ultimatum presented to us: secure the conditions whereby men will entrust their security to a larger entity, or risk annihilation; persuade men that their salvation rests in the subordination of national and local interests to the interests of humanity, or endanger man's future. These are the objectives, yesterday unobtainable, today essential, which we must labor to achieve.
Until this is accomplished, mankind's future remains hazardous and permanent peace a matter for speculation. There is no single magic formula, no one simple step, no words, whether written into the Organization's Charter or into a treaty between states, which can automatically guarantee to us what we seek. Peace is a day-to-day problem, the product of a multitude of events and judgements. Peace is not an "is", it is a "becoming." We cannot escape the dreadful possibility of catastrophe by miscalculation.
But we can reach the right decisions on the myriad subordinate problems which each new day poses, and we can thereby make our contribution and perhaps the most that can be reasonably expected of us in 1963 to the preservation of peace. It is here that the United Nations has served us - not perfectly, but well. And in enhancing the possibilities that the Organization may serve us better, we serve and bring closer our most cherished goals.
I would mention briefly today two particular issues which are of deep concern to all men: disarmament and the establishment of true equality among men. Disarmament has become the urgent imperative of our time. I do not say this because I equate the absence of arms to peace, or because I believe that bringing an end to the nuclear arms race automatically guarantees the peace, or because the elimination of nuclear warheads from the arsenals of the world will bring in its wake that change in attitude requisite to the peaceful settlement of disputes between nations. Disarmament is vital today, quite simply, because of the immense destructive capacity of which men dispose.
Ethiopia supports the atmospheric nuclear test ban treaty as a step towards this goal, even though only a partial step. Nations can still perfect weapons of mass destruction by underground testing. There is no guarantee against the sudden, unannounced resumption of testing in the atmosphere.
The real significance of the treaty is that it admits of a tacit stalemate between the nations which negotiated it, a stalemate which recognizes the blunt, unavoidable fact that none would emerge from the total destruction which would be the lot of all in a nuclear war, a stalemate which affords us and the United Nations a breathing space in which to act.
Here is our opportunity and our challenge. If the nuclear powers are prepared to declare a truce, let us seize the moment to strengthen the institutions and procedures which will serve as the means for the pacific settlement of disputes among men. Conflicts between nations will continue to arise. The real issue is whether they are to be resolved by force, or by resort to peaceful methods and procedures, administered by impartial institutions. This very Organization itself is the greatest such institution, and it is in a more powerful United Nations that we seek, and it is here that we shall find, the assurance of a peaceful future.
Were a real and effective disarmament achieved and the funds now spent in the arms race devoted to the amelioration of man's state; were we to concentrate only on the peaceful uses of nuclear knowledge, how vastly and in how short a time might we change the conditions of mankind. This should be our goal.
When we talk of the equality of man, we find, also, a challenge and an opportunity; a challenge to breathe new life into the ideals enshrined in the Charter, an opportunity to bring men closer to freedom and true equality. and thus, closer to a love of peace.
The goal of the equality of man which we seek is the antithesis of the exploitation of one people by another with which the pages of history and in particular those written of the African and Asian continents, speak at such length. Exploitation, thus viewed, has many faces. But whatever guise it assumes, this evil is to be shunned where it does not exist and crushed where it does. It is the sacred duty of this Organization to ensure that the dream of equality is finally realized for all men to whom it is still denied, to guarantee that exploitation is not reincarnated in other forms in places whence it has already been banished.
As a free Africa has emerged during the past decade, a fresh attack has been launched against exploitation, wherever it still exists. And in that interaction so common to history, this in turn, has stimulated and encouraged the remaining dependent peoples to renewed efforts to throw off the yoke which has oppressed them and its claim as their birthright the twin ideals of liberty and equality. This very struggle is a struggle to establish peace, and until victory is assured, that brotherhood and understanding which nourish and give life to peace can be but partial and incomplete.
In the United States of America, the administration of President Kennedy is leading a vigorous attack to eradicate the remaining vestige of racial discrimination from this country. We know that this conflict will be won and that right will triumph. In this time of trial, these efforts should be encouraged and assisted, and we should lend our sympathy and support to the American Government today.
Last May, in Addis Ababa, I convened a meeting of Heads of African States and Governments. In three days, the thirty-two nations represented at that Conference demonstrated to the world that when the will and the determination exist, nations and peoples of diverse backgrounds can and will work together. in unity, to the achievement of common goals and the assurance of that equality and brotherhood which we desire.
On the question of racial discrimination, the Addis Ababa Conference taught, to those who will learn, this further lesson:
that until the philosophy which holds one race superior and another inferior is finally and permanently discredited and abandoned;
that until there are no longer first class and second class citizens of any nation;
that until the color of a man's skin is of no more significance than the color of his eyes;
that until the basic human rights are equally guaranteed to all without regard to race;
that until that day, the dream of lasting peace and world citizenship and the rule of international morality will remain but a fleeting illusion, to be pursued but never attained.
And until the ignoble and unhappy regimes that hold our brothers in Angola, in Mozambique and in South Africa in subhuman bondage have been toppled and destroyed;
until bigotry and prejudice and malicious and inhuman self-interest have been replaced by understanding and tolerance and good-will;
until all Africans stand and speak as free beings, equal in the eyes of all men, as they are in the eyes of Heaven;
until that day, the African continent will not know peace. We Africans will fight, if necessary, and we know that we shall win, as we are confident in the victory of good over evil.
The United Nations has done much, both directly and indirectly to speed the disappearance of discrimination and oppression from the earth. Without the opportunity to focus world opinion on Africa and Asia which this Organization provides, the goal, for many, might still lie ahead, and the struggle would have taken far longer. For this, we are truly grateful.
But more can be done. The basis of racial discrimination and colonialism has been economic, and it is with economic weapons that these evils have been and can be overcome. In pursuance of resolutions adopted at the Addis Ababa Summit Conference, African States have undertaken certain measures in the economic field which, if adopted by all member states of the United Nations, would soon reduce intransigence to reason. I ask, today, for adherence to these measures by every nation represented here which is truly devoted to the principles enunciated in the Charter.
I do not believe that Portugal and South Africa are prepared to commit economic or physical suicide if honorable and reasonable alternatives exist. I believe that such alternatives can be found. But I also know that unless peaceful solutions are devised, counsels of moderation and temperance will avail for naught; and another blow will have been dealt to this Organization which will hamper and weaken still further its usefulness in the struggle to ensure the victory of peace and liberty over the forces of strife and oppression. Here, then, is the opportunity presented to us. We must act while we can, while the occasion exists to exert those legitimate pressures available to us, lest time run out and resort be had to less happy means.
Does this Organization today possess the authority and the will to act? And if it does not, are we prepared to clothe it with the power to create and enforce the rule of law? Or is the Charter a mere collection of words, without content and substance, because the essential spirit is lacking? The time in which to ponder these questions is all too short. The pages of history are full of instances in which the unwanted and the shunned nonetheless occurred because men waited to act until too late. We can brook no such delay.
If we are to survive, this Organization must survive. To survive, it must be strengthened. Its executive must be vested with great authority. The means for the enforcement of its decisions must be fortified, and, if they do not exist, they must be devised. Procedures must be established to protect the small and the weak when threatened by the strong and the mighty. All nations which fulfill the conditions of membership must be admitted and allowed to sit in this assemblage.
Equality of representation must be assured in each of its organs. The possibilities which exist in the United Nations to provide the medium whereby the hungry may be fed, the naked clothed, the ignorant instructed, must be seized on and exploited for the flower of peace is not sustained by poverty and want.
To achieve this requires courage and confidence. The courage, I believe, we possess. The confidence must be created, and to create confidence we must act courageously.
The great nations of the world would do well to remember that in the modern age even their own fates are not wholly in their hands. Peace demands the united efforts of us all. Who can foresee what spark might ignite the fuse? It is not only the small and the weak who must scrupulously observe their obligations to the United Nations and to each other. Unless the smaller nations are accorded their proper voice in the settlement of the world's problems, unless the equality which Africa and Asia have struggled to attain is reflected in expanded membership in the institutions which make up the United Nations, confidence will come just that much harder. Unless the rights of the least of men are as assiduously protected as those of the greatest, the seeds of confidence will fall on barren soil.
The stake of each one of us is identical - life or death. We all wish to live. We all seek a world in which men are freed of the burdens of ignorance, poverty, hunger and disease. And we shall all be hard-pressed to escape the deadly rain of nuclear fall-out should catastrophe overtake us.
When I spoke at Geneva in 1936, there was no precedent for a head of state addressing the League of Nations. I am neither the first, nor will I be the last head of state to address the United Nations, but only I have addressed both the League and this Organization in this capacity.
The problems which confront us today are, equally, unprecedented. They have no counterparts in human experience. Men search the pages of history for solutions, for precedents, but there are none.
This, then, is the ultimate challenge. Where are we to look for our survival, for the answers to the questions which have never before been posed?
We must look, first, to Almighty God, Who has raised man above the animals and endowed him with intelligence and reason. We must put our faith in Him, that He will not desert us or permit us to destroy humanity which He created in His image.
And we must look into ourselves, into the depth of our souls. We must become something we have never been and for which our education and experience and environment have ill-prepared us. We must become bigger than we have been: more courageous, greater in spirit, larger in outlook. We must become members of a new race, overcoming petty prejudice, owing our ultimate allegiance not to nations but to our fellow men within the human community.
  This work is a translation and has a separate copyright status to the applicable copyright protections of the original content.
Original:
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was first published in Ethiopia, which is not a participant in the Berne Convention or any other treaty on copyright with the United States, and was not simultaneously published in another country.
This work is also in the public domain in Ethiopia if it meets one of the following criteria:
It is an anonymous, pseudonymous or posthumous work and 50 years have passed since the date of its publication.
It is a collective or audiovisual work and 50 years have passed since the date of its publication.
It is a photographic work, and 25 years have passed since the date of its creation (or publication, whatever date is the latest).
It is another kind of work, and 50 years have passed since the year of death of the author (or last-surviving author).
It is "any official text of a legislative, administrative or of legal nature, as well as official translations thereof".
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
Translation:
This work is excerpted from an official document of the United Nations. The policy of this organisation is to keep most of its documents in the public domain in order to disseminate "as widely as possible the ideas (contained) in the United Nations Publications".
Pursuant to UN Administrative Instruction ST/AI/189/Add.9/Rev.2 available in English only, these documents are in the public domain worldwide:
Official records (proceedings of conferences, verbatim and summary records, …)
United Nations documents issued with a UN symbol
Public information material designed primarily to inform the public about United Nations activities (not including public information material that is offered for sale).
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1454
Cached time: 20221017072515
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.081 seconds
Real time usage: 0.118 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 578/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 29369/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 16078/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 0/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.030/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1480224/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%   95.253      1 -total
 61.59%   58.666      1 Template:Header
 29.54%   28.137      1 Template:Translation_license
 16.88%   16.083      1 Template:License_container_begin
 15.21%   14.490      1 Template:Collapsible_box
 11.66%   11.109      2 Template:License
 10.34%    9.851      1 Template:PD-UN
  9.95%    9.481      1 Template:Header/main_block
  8.64%    8.231      1 Template:Textquality
  5.77%    5.496      4 Template:License_scope
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:135403-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017072515 and revision id 10223497.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Haile_Selassie%27s_address_to_the_United_Nations,_1963&oldid=10223497"
Categories: 75%1963 worksPD-EthiopiaPD-UNEthiopiaUnited NationsSpeeches
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Español
Edit links
 This page was last edited on 2 June 2020, at 19:36.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
hou, a high-loper or a lully-prigger[FN#97]?"
"A little more ceremony between coves in the lorst,[FN#98]"
whispered the king, speaking as a flash man, "were not out of
place. But, look sharp, mind old Oliver,[FN#99] or the lamb-skin
man[FN#100] will have the pull of us, and as sure as eggs is eggs
we shall be scragged as soon as lagged.[FN#101]"
"Well, keep your red rag[FN#102] quiet," grumbled the other, "and
let us be working."
Then the pair, king and thief, began work in right earnest. The
gang seemed to swarm in the street. They were drinking spirits,
slaying victims, rubbing their bodies with oil, daubing their eyes
with lamp-black, and repeating incantations to enable them to see
in the darkness; others were practicing the lessons of the god with
the golden spear,[FN#103] and carrying out the four modes of
breaching a house: 1. Picking out burnt bricks.  2.Cutting through
unbaked ones when old, when softened by recent damp, by
exposure to the sun, or by saline exudations.  3. Throwing water on
a mud wall; and 4. Boring through one of wood. The sons of
Skanda were making breaches in the shape of lotus blossoms, the
sun, the new moon, the lake, and the water jar, and they seemed to
be anointed with magic unguents, so that no eye could behold, no
weapon harm them.
At length having filled his bag with costly plunder, the thief said to
the king, "Now, my rummy cove, we'll be off to the flash ken,
where the lads and the morts are waiting to wet their whistles."
Randhir, who as a king was perfectly familiar with "thieves'
Latin," took heart, and resolved to hunt out the secrets of the den.
On the way, his companion, perfectly satisfied with the importance
which the new cove had attached to a rat-hole,[FN#104] and
convinced that he was a true robber, taught him the whistle, the
word, and the sign peculiar to the gang, and promised him that he
should smack the lit[FN#105] that night before "turning in."
So saying the thief rapped twice at the city gate, which was at once
opened to him, and preceding his accomplice led the way to a rock
about two kos (four miles) distant from the walls. Before entering
the dark forest at the foot of the eminence, the robber stood still for
a moment and whistled twice through his fingers with a shrill
scream that rang through the silent glades. After a few minutes the
signal was answered by the hooting of an owl, which the robber
acknowledged by shrieking like a jackal. Thereupon half a dozen
armed men arose from their crouching places in the grass, and one
advanced towards the new comers to receive the sign. It was given,
and they both passed on, whilst the guard sank, as it were, into the
bowels of the earth. All these things Randhir carefully remarked:
besides which he neglected not to take note of all the
distinguishable objects that lay on the road, and, when he entered
the wood, he scratched with his dagger all the tree trunks within
reach.
After a sharp walk the pair reached a high perpendicular sheet  of
rock, rising abruptly from a clear space in the jungle, and profusely
printed over with vermilion hands. The thief, having walked up to
it, and made his obeisance, stooped to the ground, and removed a
bunch of grass. The two then raised by their united efforts a heavy
trap door, through which poured a stream of light, whilst a
confused hubbub of voices was heard below.
"This is the ken," said the robber, preparing to descend a thin
ladder of bamboo, "follow me!" And he disappeared with his bag
of valuables.
The king did as he was bid, and the pair entered together a large
hall, or rather a cave, which presented a singular spectacle.  It was
lighted up by links fixed to the sombre walls, which threw a smoky
glare over the place, and the contrast after the deep darkness
reminded Randhir of his mother's descriptions of Patal-puri, the
infernal city. Carpets of every kind, from the choicest tapestry to
the coarsest rug, were spread upon the ground, and were strewed
with bags, wallets, weapons, heaps of booty, drinking cups, and all
the materials of debauchery.
Passing through this cave the thief led Randhir into another, which
was full of thieves, preparing for the pleasures of the night. Some
were changing garments, ragged and dirtied by creeping through
gaps in the houses: others were washing the blood from their hands
and feet; these combed out their long dishevelled, dusty hair: those
anointed their skins with perfumed cocoa-nut oil. There were all
manner of murderers present, a villanous collection of Kartikeya's
and Bhawani's[FN#106] crew. There were stabbers with their
poniards hung to lanyards lashed round their naked waists,
Dhaturiya- poisoners[FN#107] distinguished by the little bag slung
under the left arm, and Phansigars[FN#108] wearing their fatal
kerchiefs round their necks. And Randhir had reason to thank the
good deed in the last life that had sent him there in such strict
disguise, for amongst the robbers he found, as might be expected, a
number of his own people, spies and watchmen, guards and
patrols.
The thief, whose importance of manner now showed him to be the
chief of the gang, was greeted with applause as he entered the
robing room, and he bade all make salam to the new companion. A
number of questions concerning the success of the night's work
was quickly put and answered:  then the company, having got
ready for the revel, flocked into the first cave. There they sat down
each in his own place, and began to eat and drink and make merry.
After some hours the flaring torches began to burn out, and
drowsiness to overpower the strongest heads. Most of the robbers
rolled themselves up in the rugs, and covering their heads, went to
sleep. A few still sat with their backs to the wall, nodding drowsily
or leaning on one side, and too stupefied with opium and hemp to
make any exertion.
At that moment a servant woman, whom the king saw for the first
time, came into the cave, and looking at him exclaimed, "O Raja!
how came you with these wicked men? Do you run away as fast as
you can, or they will surely kill you when they awake."
"I do not know the way; in which direction am I to go?"  asked
Randhir.
The woman then showed him the road. He threaded the confused
mass of snorers, treading with the foot of a tiger-cat, found the
ladder, raised the trap-door by exerting all his strength, and
breathed once more the open air of heaven. And before plunging
into the depths of the wood he again marked the place where the
entrance lay and carefully replaced the bunch of grass.
Hardly had Raja Randhir returned to the palace, and removed the
traces of his night's occupation, when he received a second
deputation of the merchants, complaining bitterly and with the
longest faces about their fresh misfortunes.
"O pearl of equity!" said the men of money, "but yesterday you
consoled us with the promise of some contrivance by the blessing
of which our houses and coffers would be safe from theft; whereas
our goods have never yet suffered so severely as during the last
twelve hours."
Again Randhir dismissed them, swearing that this time he would
either die or destroy the wretches who had been guilty of such
violence.
Then having mentally prepared his measures, the Raja warned a
company of archers to hold themselves in readiness for secret
service, and as each one of his own people returned from the
robbers' cave he had him privily arrested and put to death--because
the deceased, it is said, do not, like Baitals, tell tales. About
nightfall, when he thought that the thieves, having finished their
work of  plunder, would meet together as usual for wassail and
debauchery, he armed himself, marched out his men, and led them
to the rock in the jungle.
But the robbers, aroused by the disappearance of the new
companion, had made enquiries and had gained intelligence of the
impending danger. They feared to flee during the daytime, lest
being tracked they should be discovered and destroyed in detail.
When night came they hesitated to disperse, from the certainty that
they would be captured in the morning. Then their captain, who
throughout had been of one opinion, proposed to them that they
should resist,  and promised them success if  they would hear his
words. The gang  respected him, for he was known to be brave:
they all listened to his advice, and they promised to be obedient.
As young night began to cast transparent shade upon the jungle
ground, the chief of the thieves mustered his men, inspected their
bows and arrows, gave them encouraging words, and led them
forth from the cave. Having placed them in ambush he climbed the
rock to espy the movements of the enemy, whilst others applied
their noses and ears to the level ground. Presently the moon shone
full upon Randhir and his band of archers, who were advancing
quickly and carelessly, for they expected to catch the robbers in
their cave. The captain allowed them to march nearly through the
line of ambush. Then he gave the signal, and at that moment the
thieves, rising suddenly from the bush fell upon the royal troops
and drove them back in confusion.
The king also fled, when the chief of the robbers shouted out,
"Hola! thou a Rajput and running away from combat?" Randhir
hearing this halted, and the two, confronting each other, bared their
blades and began to do battle with prodigious fury.
The king was cunning of fence, and so was the thief. They opened
the duel, as skilful swordsmen should, by bending almost double,
skipping in a circle, each keeping his eye well fixed upon the
other, with frowning brows and contemptuous lips; at the same
time executing divers gambados and measured leaps, springing
forward like frogs and backward like monkeys, and beating time
with their sabres upon their shields, which rattled like drums.
Then Randhir suddenly facing his antagonist, cut at his legs with a
loud cry, but the thief sprang in the air, and the blade whistled
harmlessly under him. Next moment the robber chief's sword,
thrice whirled round his head, descended like lightning in a
slanting direction towards the king's left shoulder: the latter,
however, received it upon his target and escaped all hurt, though
he staggered with the violence of the blow.
And thus they continued attacking each other, parrying and
replying, till their breath failed them and their hands and wrists
were numbed and cramped with fatigue. They were so well
matched in courage, strength, and address, that neither obtained the
least advantage, till the robber's right foot catching a stone slid
from under him, and thus he fell to the ground at the mercy of his
enemy. The thieves fled, and the Raja, himself on his prize, tied his
hands behind him, and brought him back to the city at the point of
his good sword.
The next morning Randhir visited his prisoner, whom he caused to
be bathed, and washed, and covered with fine clothes. He then had
him mounted on a camel and sent him on a circuit of the city,
accompanied by a crier proclaiming aloud: "Who hears! who
hears! who hears! the king commands! This is the thief who has
robbed and plundered the city of Chandrodaya. Let all men
therefore assemble themselves together this evening in the open
space outside the gate leading towards the sea. And let them
behold the penalty of evil deeds, and learn to be wise."
Randhir had condemned the thief to be crucified,[FN#109] nailed
and tied with his hands and feet stretched out at full length, in an
erect posture until death; everything he wished to eat was ordered
to him in order to prolong life and misery. And when death should
draw near, melted gold was to be poured down his throat till it
should burst from his neck and other parts of his body.
In the evening the thief was led out for execution, and by chance
the procession passed close to the house of a wealthy landowner.
He had a favourite daughter named Shobhani, who was in the
flower of her youth and very lovely; every day she improved, and
every moment added to her grace and beauty. The girl had been
carefully kept out of sight of mankind, never being allowed outside
the high walls of the garden, because her nurse, a wise woman
much trusted in the neighbourhood, had at the hour of death given
a solemn warning to her parents. The prediction was that the
maiden should be the admiration of the city, and should die a Sati-
widow[FN#110] before becoming a wife. From that hour Shobhani
was kept as a pearl in its casket by her father, who had vowed
never to survive her, and had even fixed upon the place and style
of his suicide.
But the shaft of Fate[FN#111] strikes down the vulture sailing
above the clouds, and follows the worm into the bowels of the
earth, and pierces the fish at the bottom of the ocean--how then can
mortal man expect to escape it? As the robber chief, mounted upon
the camel, was passing to the cross under the old householder's
windows, a fire breaking out in the women's apartments, drove the
inmates into the rooms looking upon the street.
The hum of many voices arose from the solid pavement of heads:
"This is the thief who has been robbing the whole city; let him
tremble now, for Randhir will surely crucify him!"
In beauty and bravery of bearing, as in strength and courage, no
man in Chandrodaya surpassed the robber, who, being
magnificently dressed, looked, despite his disgraceful cavalcade,
like the son of a king. He sat with an unmoved countenance, hardly
hearing in his pride the scoffs of the mob; calm and steady when
the whole city was frenzied with anxiety because of him. But as he
heard the word "tremble" his lips quivered, his eyes flashed fire,
and deep lines gathered between his eyebrows.
Shobhani started with a scream from the casement behind which
she had hid herself, gazing with an intense womanly curiosity into
the thoroughfare. The robber's face was upon a level with, and not
half a dozen feet from, her pale cheeks. She marked his handsome
features, and his look of wrath made her quiver as if it had been a
flash of lightning. Then she broke away from the fascination of his
youth and beauty, and ran breathless to her father, saying:
"Go this moment and get that thief released!
"The old housekeeper replied: "That thief has been pilfering and
plundering the whole city, and by his means the king's archers
were defeated; why, then, at my request, should our most gracious
Raja Randhir release him?"
Shobhani, almost beside herself, exclaimed: "If by giving up your
whole property, you can induce the Raja to release him, then
instantly so do; if he does not come to me, I must give up my life!"
The maiden then covered her head with her veil, and sat down in
the deepest despair, whilst her father, hearing her words, burst into
a cry of grief, and hastened to present himself before the Raja. He
cried out:
"O great king, be pleased to receive four lakhs of rupees, and to
release this thief."
But the king replied: "He has been robbing the whole city, and by
reason of him my guards have been destroyed. I cannot by any
means release him."
Then the old householder finding, as he had expected the Raja
inexorable, and not to be moved, either by tears or bribes, or by the
cruel fate of the girl, returned home with fire in his heart, and
addressed her:
"Daughter, I have said and done all that is possible but it avails
me nought with the king. Now, then, we die."
In the mean time, the guards having led the thief all round the city,
took him outside the gates, and made him stand near the cross.
Then the messengers of death arrived from the palace, and the
executioners began to nail his limbs. He bore the agony with the
fortitude of the brave; but when he heard what had been done by
the old householder's daughter, he raised his voice and wept
bitterly, as though his heart had been bursting, and almost with the
same breath he laughed heartily as at a feast. All were startled by
his merriment; coming as it did at a time when the iron was
piercing his flesh, no man could see any reason for it.
When he died, Shobhani, who was married to him in the  spirit,
recited to herself these sayings:
"There are thirty-five millions of hairs on the human body. The
woman who ascends the pile with her husband will remain so
many years in heaven. As the snake-catcher draws the serpent
from his hole, so she, rescuing her husband from hell, rejoices with
him; aye, though he may have sunk to a  region of torment, be
restrained in dreadful bonds, have reached the place of anguish, be
exhausted of strength, and afflicted and tortured for his crimes. No
other effectual duty is known for virtuous women at any time after
the death of their lords, except casting themselves into the same
fire. As long as a woman in her successive transmigrations, shall
decline burning herself, like a faithful wife, in the same fire  with
her deceased lord, so long shall she not be exempted  from
springing again to life in the body of some female animal."
Therefore the beautiful Shobhani, virgin and wife, resolved to burn
herself, and to make the next life of the thief certain. She showed
her courage by thrusting her finger into a torch flame till it became
a cinder, and she solemnly bathed in the nearest stream.
A hole was dug in the ground, and upon a bed of green tree-trunks
were heaped hemp, pitch, faggots, and clarified butter, to form the
funeral pyre. The dead body, anointed, bathed, and dressed in new
clothes, was then laid upon the heap, which was some two feet
high. Shobhani prayed that as long as fourteen Indras reign, or as
many years as there are hairs in her head, she might abide in
heaven with her husband, and be waited upon by the heavenly
dancers. She then presented her ornaments and little gifts of corn
to her friends, tied some cotton round both wrists, put two new
combs in her hair, painted her forehead, and tied up in the end of
her body-cloth clean parched rice[FN#112] and cowrie-shells.
These she gave to the bystanders, as she walked seven times round
the funeral pyre, upon which lay the body. She then ascended the
heap of wood, sat down upon it, and taking the thief's head in her
lap, without cords or levers or upper layer or faggots, she ordered
the pile to be lighted. The crowd standing around set fire to it in
several places, drummed their drums, blew their conchs, and raised
a loud cry of "Hari bol! Hari bol! [FN#113]" Straw was thrown on,
and pitch and clarified butter were freely poured out. But
Shobhani's was a Sahamaran, a blessed easy death: no part of her
body was seen to move after the pyre was lighted--in fact, she
seemed to die before the flame touched her.
By the blessing of his daughter's decease, the old householder
beheaded himself.[FN#114] He caused an instrument to be made
in the shape of a half-moon with an edge like a razor, and fitting
the back of his neck. At both ends of it, as at the beam of a
balance, chains were fastened. He sat down with eyes closed; he
was rubbed with the purifying clay of the holy river,
Vaiturani[FN#115]; and he repeated the proper incantations. Then
placing his feet upon the extremities of the chains, he suddenly
jerked up his neck, and his severed head rolled from his body upon
the ground. What a happy death was this!
The Baital was silent, as if meditating on the fortunate
transmigration which the old householder had thus secured.
"But what could the thief have been laughing at, sire?" asked the
young prince Dharma Dhwaj of his father.
"At the prodigious folly of the girl, my son," replied the warrior
king, thoughtlessly.
"I am indebted once more to your majesty," burst out the Baital,
"for releasing me from this unpleasant position, but the Raja's
penetration is again at fault. Not to leave your royal son and heir
labouring under a false impression, before going I will explain
why the brave thief burst into tears, and why he laughed at such a
moment.
"He wept when he reflected that he could not requite her kindness
in being willing to give up everything she had in the world to save
his life; and this thought deeply grieved him.
Then it struck him as being passing strange that she had begun to
love him when the last sand of his life was well nigh run out; that
wondrous are the ways of the revolving heavens which bestow
wealth upon the niggard that cannot use it, wisdom upon the bad
man who will misuse it, a beautiful wife upon the fool who cannot
protect her, and fertilizing showers upon the stony hills. And
thinking over these things, the gallant and beautiful thief laughed
aloud.
"Before returning to my sires-tree," continued the Vampire, "as I
am about to do in virtue of your majesty's unintelligent reply, I
may remark that men may laugh and cry, or may cry and laugh,
about everything in this world, from their neighbours' deaths,
which, as a general rule, in no wise concern them, to their own
latter ends, which do concern them exceedingly. For my part, I am
in the habit of laughing at everything, because it animates the
brain, stimulates the lungs, beautifies the countenance, and--for the
moment, good-bye, Raja Vikram!
The warrior king, being forewarned this time, shifted the bundle
containing the Baital from his back to under his arm, where he
pressed it with all his might.
This proceeding, however, did not prevent the Vampire from
slipping back to his tree, and leaving an empty cloth with the Raja.
Presently the demon was trussed up as usual; a voice sounded
behind Vikram, and the loquacious thing again began to talk.
        THE VAMPIRE'S SIXTH STORY.
In Which Three Men Dispute about a Woman.
On the lovely banks of Jumna's stream there was a city known as
Dharmasthal--the Place of Duty; and therein dwelt a certain
Brahman called Keshav. He was a very pious man, in the constant
habit of performing penance and worship upon the river Sidi. He
modelled his own clay images instead of buying them from others;
he painted holy stones red at the top, and made to them offerings
of flowers, fruit, water, sweetmeats, and fried peas. He had
become a learned man somewhat late in life, having, until twenty
years old, neglected his reading, and addicted himself to
worshipping the beautiful youth Kama-Deva[FN#116] and Rati his
wife, accompanied by the cuckoo, the humming-bee, and sweet
breezes.
One day his parents having rebuked him sharply for his
ungovernable conduct, Keshav wandered to a neighbouring
hamlet, and hid himself in the tall fig-tree which shadowed a
celebrated image of Panchanan.[FN#117] Presently an evil thought
arose in his head: he defiled the god, and threw him into the
nearest tank.
The next morning, when the person arrived whose livelihood
depended on the image, he discovered that his god was gone. He
returned into the village distracted, and all was soon in an uproar
about the lost deity.
In the midst of this confusion the parents of Keshav arrived,
seeking for their son; and a man in the crowd declared that he had
seen a young man sitting in Panchanan's tree, but what had become
of the god he knew not.
The runaway at length appeared, and the suspicions of the villagers
fell upon him as the stealer of Panchanan. He confessed the fact,
pointed out the place where he had thrown the stone, and added
that he had polluted the god. All hands and eyes were raised in
amazement at this atrocious crime, and every one present declared
that Panchanan would certainly punish the daring insult by
immediate death. Keshav was dreadfully frightened; he began to
obey his parents from that very hour, and applied to his studies so
sedulously that he soon became the most learned man of his
country.
Now Keshav the Brahman had a daughter whose name was the
Madhumalati or Sweet Jasmine. She was very beautiful. Whence
did the gods procure the materials to form so exquisite a face?
They took a portion of the most excellent part of the moon to form
that beautiful face? Does any one seek a proof of this? Let him
look at the empty places left in the moon. Her eyes resembled the
full-blown blue nymphaea; her arms the charming stalk of the
lotus; her flowing tresses the thick darkness of night.
When this lovely person arrived at a marriageable age, her mother,
father, and brother, all three became very anxious about her. For
the wise have said, "A daughter nubile but without a husband is
ever a calamity hanging over a house." And, "Kings, women, and
climbing plants love those who are near them." Also, "Who is
there that has not suffered from the sex? for a woman cannot be
kept in due subjection, either by gifts or kindness, or correct
conduct, or the greatest services, or the laws of morality, or by the
terror of punishment, for she cannot discriminate between good
and evil." 
It so happened that one day Keshav the Brahman went to the
marriage of a certain customer of his,[FN#118] and his son
repaired to the house of a spiritual preceptor in order to read.
During their absence, a young man came to the house, when the
Sweet Jasmine's mother, inferring his good qualities from his good
looks, said to him, "I will give to thee my daughter in marriage."
The father also had promised his daughter to a Brahman youth
whom he had met at the house of his employer; and the brother
likewise had betrothed his sister to a fellow student at the place
where he had gone to read.
After some days father and son came home, accompanied by these
two suitors, and in the house a third was already seated. The name
of the first was Tribikram, of the second Baman, and of the third
Madhusadan. The three were equal in mind and body, in
knowledge, and in age.
Then the father, looking upon them, said to himself, "Ho! there is
one bride and three bridegrooms; to whom shall I give, and to
whom shall I not give? We three have pledged our word to these
three. A strange circumstance has occurred; what must we do?" 
He then proposed to them a trial of wisdom, and made them agree
that he who should quote the most excellent saying of the wise
should become his daughter's husband.
Quoth Tribikram: "Courage is tried in war; integrity in the
payment of debt and interest; friendship in distress; and the
faithfulness of a wife in the day of poverty." 
Baman proceeded: "That woman is destitute of virtue who in her
father's house is not in subjection, who wanders to feasts and
amusements, who throws off her veil in the presence of men, who
remains as a guest in the houses of strangers, who is much devoted
to sleep, who drinks inebriating beverages, and who delights in
distance from her husband." 
"Let none," pursued Madhusadan, "confide in the sea, nor in
whatever has claws or horns, or who carries deadly weapons;
neither in a woman, nor in a king." 
Whilst the Brahman was doubting which to prefer, and rather
inclining to the latter sentiment, a serpent bit the beautiful girl, and
in a few hours she died.
Stunned by this awful sudden death, the father and the three suitors
sat for a time motionless. They then arose, used great exertions,
and brought all kinds of sorcerers, wise men and women who
charm away poisons by incantations. These having seen the girl
said, "She cannot return to life." The first declared, "A person
always dies who has been bitten by a snake on the fifth, sixth,
eighth, ninth, and fourteenth days of the lunar month." The second
asserted, "One who has been bitten on a Saturday or a Tuesday
does not survive." The third opined, "Poison infused during certain
six lunar mansions cannot be got under." Quoth the fourth, "One
who has been bitten in any organ of sense, the lower lip, the cheek,
the neck, or the stomach, cannot escape death." The fifth said, "In
this case even Brahma, the Creator, could not restore life--of what
account, then, are we? Do you perform the funeral rites; we will
depart." 
Thus saying, the sorcerers went their way. The mourning father
took up his daughter's corpse and caused it to be burnt, in the place
where dead bodies are usually burnt, and returned to his house.
After that the three young men said to one another, "We must now
seek happiness elsewhere. And what better can we do than obey
the words of Indra, the God of Air, who spake thus ?-- 
"'For a man who does not travel about there is no felicity, and a
good man who stays at home is a bad man. Indra is the friend of
him who travels. Travel! 
"'A traveller's legs are like blossoming branches, and he himself
grows and gathers the fruit. All his wrongs vanish, destroyed by
his exertion on the roadside. Travel! 
"'The fortune of a man who sits, sits also; it rises when he rises; it
sleeps when he sleeps; it moves well when he moves. Travel! 
"'A man who sleeps is like the Iron Age. A man who awakes is like
the Bronze Age. A man who rises up is like the Silver Age. A man
who travels is like the Golden Age. Travel! 
"'A traveller finds honey; a traveller finds sweet figs. Look at the
happiness of the sun, who travailing never tires. Travel!"' 
Before parting they divided the relics of the beloved one, and then
they went their way.
Tribikram, having separated and tied up the burnt bones, became
one of the Vaisheshikas, in those days a powerful sect. He
solemnly forswore the eight great crimes, namely: feeding at night;
slaying any animal; eating the fruit of trees that give milk, or
pumpkins or young bamboos: tasting honey or flesh; plundering
the wealth of others; taking by force a married woman; eating
flowers, butter, or cheese; and worshipping the gods of other
religions. He learned that the highest act of virtue is to abstain
from doing injury to sentient creatures; that crime does not justify
the destruction of life; and that kings, as the administrators of
criminal justice, are the greatest of sinners. He professed the five
vows of total abstinence from falsehood, eating flesh or fish, theft,
drinking spirits, and marriage. He bound himself to possess
nothing beyond a white loin-cloth, a towel to wipe the mouth, a
beggar's dish, and a brush of woollen threads to sweep the ground
for fear of treading on insects. And he was ordered to fear secular
affairs; the miseries of a future state; the receiving from others
more than the food of a day at once; all accidents; provisions, if
connected with the destruction of animal life; death and disgrace;
also to please all, and to obtain compassion from all.
He attempted to banish his love. He said to himself, "Surely it was
owing only to my pride and selfishness that I ever looked upon a
woman as capable of affording happiness; and I thought, 'Ah! ah!
thine eyes roll about like the tail of the water-wagtail, thy lips
resemble the ripe fruit, thy bosom is like the lotus bud, thy form is
resplendent as gold melted in a crucible, the moon wanes through
desire to imitate the shadow of thy face, thou resemblest the
pleasure-house of Cupid; the happiness of all time is concentrated
in thee; a touch from thee would surely give life to a dead image;
at thy approach a living admirer would be changed by joy into a
lifeless stone; obtaining thee I can face all the horrors of war; and
were I pierced by showers of arrows, one glance of thee would
heal all my wounds.' 
"My mind is now averted from the world. Seeing her I say, 'Is this
the form by which men are bewitched? This is a basket covered
with skin; it contains bones, flesh, blood, and impurities. The
stupid creature who is captivated by this--is there a cannibal
feeding in Currim a greater cannibal than he? These persons call a
thing made up of impure matter a face, and drink its charms as a
drunkard swallows the inebriating liquor from his cup. The blind,
infatuated beings! Why should I be pleased or displeased with this
body, composed of flesh and blood? It is my duty to seek Him who
is the Lord of this body, and to disregard everything which gives
rise either to pleasure or to pain.'"
Baman, the second suitor, tied up a bundle of his beloved one's
ashes, and followed--somewhat prematurely--the precepts of the
great lawgiver Manu. "When the father of a family perceives his
muscles becoming flaccid, and his hair grey, and sees the child of
his child, let him then take refuge in a forest. Let him take up his
consecrated fire and all his domestic implements for making
oblations to it, and, departing from the town to the lonely wood, let
him dwell in it with complete power over his organs of sense and
of action. With many sorts of pure food, such as holy sages used to
eat, with green herbs, roots, and fruit, let him perform the five
great sacraments, introducing them with due ceremonies. Let him
wear a black antelope-hide, or a vesture of bark; let him bathe
evening and morning; let him suffer the hair of his head, his beard
and his nails to grow continually. Let him slide backwards and
forwards on the ground; or let him stand a whole day on tiptoe; or
let him continue in motion, rising and sitting alternately; but at
sunrise, at noon, and at sunset, let him go to the waters and bathe
In the hot season let him sit exposed to five fires, four blazing
around him, with the sun above; in the rains let him stand
uncovered, without even a mantle, where the clouds pour the
heaviest showers; in the cold season let him wear damp clothes,
and let him increase by degrees the austerity of his devotions.
Then, having reposited his holy fires, as the law directs, in his
mind, let him live without external fire, without a mansion, wholly
silent, feeding on roots and fruit." 
Meanwhile Madhusadan the third, having taken a wallet and
neckband, became a Jogi, and began to wander far and wide, living
on nothing but chaff, and practicing his devotions. In order to see
Brahma he attended to the following duties; 1. Hearing; 2.
Meditation; 3. Fixing the Mind; 4. Absorbing the Mind. He
combated the three evils, restlessness, injuriousness,
voluptuousness by settling the Deity in his spirit, by subjecting his
senses, and by destroying desire. Thus he would do away with the
illusion (Maya) which conceals all true knowledge. He repeated
the name of the Deity till it appeared to him in the form of a Dry
Light or glory. Though connected with the affairs of life, that is,
with affairs belonging to a body containing blood, bones, and
impurities; to organs which are blind, palsied, and full of weakness
and error; to a mind filled with thirst, hunger, sorrow, infatuation;
to confirmed habits, and to the fruits of former births: still he
strove not to view these things as realities. He made a companion
of a dog, honouring it with his own food, so as the better to think
on spirit. He practiced all the five operations connected with the
vital air, or air collected in the body. He attended much to
Pranayama, or the gradual suppression of breathing, and he
secured fixedness of mind as follows. By placing his sight and
thoughts on the tip of his nose he perceived smell; on the tip of his
tongue he realized taste, on the root of his tongue he knew sound,
and so forth. He practiced the eighty-four Asana or postures,
raising his hand to the wonders of the heavens, till he felt no longer
the inconveniences of heat or cold, hunger or thirst. He particularly
preferred the Padma or lotus-posture, which consists of bringing
the feet to the sides, holding the right in the left hand and the left in
the right. In the work of suppressing his breath he permitted its
respiration to reach at furthest twelve fingers' breadth, and
gradually diminished the distance from his nostrils till he could
confine it to the length of twelve fingers from his nose, and even
after restraining it for some time he would draw it from no greater
distance than from his heart. As respects time, he began by
retaining inspiration for twenty-six seconds, and he enlarged this
period gradually till he became perfect. He sat cross-legged,
closing with his fingers all the avenues of inspiration, and he
practiced Prityahara, or the power of restraining the members of
the body and mind, with meditation and concentration, to which
there are four enemies, viz., a sleepy heart, human passions, a
confused mind, and attachment to anything but the one Brahma.
He also cultivated Yama, that is, inoffensiveness, truth, honesty,
the forsaking of all evil in the world, and the refusal of gifts except
for sacrifice, and Nihama, i.e., purity relative to the use of water
after defilement, pleasure in everything whether in prosperity or
adversity, renouncing food when hungry, and keeping down the
body. Thus delivered from these four enemies of the flesh, he
resembled the unruffled flame of the lamp, and by Brahmagnana,
or meditating on the Deity, placing his mind on the sun, moon,
fire, or any other luminous body, or within his heart, or at the
bottom of his throat, or in the centre of his skull, he was enabled to
ascend from gross images of omnipotence to the works and the
divine wisdom of the glorious original.
One day Madhusadan, the Jogi, went to a certain house for food,
and the householder having seen him began to say, "Be so good as
to take your food here this day!" The visitor sat down, and when
the victuals were ready, the host caused his feet and hands to be
washed, and leading him to the Chauka, or square place upon
which meals are served, seated him and sat by him. And he quoted
the scripture: "No guest must be dismissed in the evening by a
housekeeper: he is sent by the returning sun, and whether he come
in fit season or unseasonably, he must not sojourn in the house
without entertainment: let me not eat any delicate food, without
asking my guest to partake of it: the satisfaction of a guest will
assuredly bring the housekeeper wealth, reputation, long life, and a
place in heaven." 
The householder's wife then came to serve up the food, rice and
split peas, oil, and spices, all cooked in a new earthen pot with
pure firewood. Part of the meal was served and the rest remained
to be served, when the woman's little child began to cry aloud and
to catch hold of its mother's dress. She endeavoured to release
herself, but the boy would not let go, and the more she coaxed the
more he cried, and was obstinate. On this the mother became
angry, took up the boy and threw him upon the fire, which
instantly burnt him to ashes.
Madhusadan, the Jogi, seeing this, rose up without eating. The
master of the house said to him, "Why eatest thou not?" He
replied, "I am ' Atithi,' that is to say, to be entertained at your
house, but how can one eat under the roof of a person who has
committed such a Rakshasa-like (devilish) deed? Is it not said, 'He
who does not govern his passions, lives in vain'? 'A foolish king, a
person puffed up with riches, and a weak child, desire that which
cannot be procured'? Also, 'A king destroys his enemies, even
when flying; and the touch of an elephant, as well as the breath of
a serpent, are fatal; but the wicked destroy even while laughing'?"
Hearing this, the householder smiled; presently he arose and went
to another part of the tenement, and brought back with him a book,
treating on Sanjivnividya, or the science of restoring the dead to
life. This he had taken from its hidden place, two beams almost
touching one another with the ends in the opposite wall. The
precious volume was in single leaves, some six inches broad by
treble that length, and the paper was stained with yellow orpiment
and the juice of tamarind seeds to keep away insects.
The householder opened the cloth containing the book, untied the
flat boards at the top and bottom, and took out from it a charm.
Having repeated this Mantra, with many ceremonies, he at once
restored the child to life, saying, "Of all precious things,
knowledge is the most valuable; other riches may be stolen, or
diminished by expenditure, but knowledge is immortal, and the
greater the expenditure the greater the increase; it can be shared
with none, and it defies the power of the thief." 
The Jogi, seeing this marvel, took thought in his heart, "If I could
obtain that book, I would restore my beloved to life, and give up
this course of uncomfortable postures and difficulty of breathing."
With this resolution he sat down to his food, and remained in the
house.
At length night came, and after a time, all, having eaten supper,
and gone to their sleeping-places, lay down. The Jogi also went to
rest in one part of the house, but did not allow sleep to close his
eyes. When he thought that a fourth part of the hours of darkness
had sped, and that all were deep in slumber, then he got up very
quietly, and going into the room of the master of the house, he
took down the book from the beam-ends and went his ways.
Madhusadan, the Jogi, went straight to the place where the
beautiful Sweet Jasmine had been burned. There he found his two
rivals sitting talking together and comparing experiences. They
recognized him at once, and cried aloud to him, "Brother! thou
also hast been wandering over the world; tell us this--hast thou
learned anything which can profit us?" He replied, "I have learned
the science of restoring the dead to life"; upon which they both
exclaimed, "If thou hast really learned such knowledge, restore our
beloved to life." 
Madhusadan proceeded to make his incantations, despite terrible
sights in the air, the cries of jackals, owls, crows, cats, asses,
vultures, dogs, and lizards, and the wrath of innumerable invisible
beings, such as messengers of Yama (Pluto), ghosts, devils,
demons, imps, fiends, devas, succubi, and others. All the three
lovers drawing blood from their own bodies, offered it to the
goddess Chandi, repeating the following incantation, "Hail!
supreme delusion! Hail! goddess of the universe! Hail! thou who
fulfillest the desires of all. May I presume to offer thee the blood
of my body; and wilt thou deign to accept it, and be propitious
towards me!"
They then made a burnt-offering of their flesh, and each one
prayed, "Grant me, O goddess! to see the maiden alive again, in
proportion to the fervency with which I present thee with mine
own flesh, invoking thee to be propitious to me. Salutation to thee
again and again, under the mysterious syllables any! any!"
Then they made a heap of the bones and the ashes, which had been
carefully kept by Tribikram and Baman. As the Jogi Madhusadan
proceeded with his incantation, a white vapour arose from the
ground, and, gradually condensing, assumed a perispiritual form--
the fluid envelope of the soul. The three spectators felt their blood
freeze as the bones and the ashes were gradually absorbed into the
before shadowy shape, and they were restored to themselves only
when the maiden Madhuvati begged to be taken home to her
mother.
Then Kama, God of Love, blinded them, and they began fiercely to
quarrel about who should have the beautiful maid. Each wanted to
be her sole master. Tribikram declared the bones to be the great
fact of the incantation; Baman swore by the ashes; and
Madhusadan laughed them both to scorn. No one could decide the
dispute; the wisest doctors were all nonplussed; and as for the
Raja--well! we do not go for wit or wisdom to kings. I wonder if
the great Raja Vikram could decide which person the woman
belonged to?
"To Baman, the man who kept her ashes, fellow!" exclaimed the
hero, not a little offended by the free remarks of the fiend.
"Yet," rejoined the Baital impudently, "if Tribikram had not
preserved her bones how could she have been restored to life? And
if Madhusadan had not learned the science of restoring the dead to
life how could she have been revivified? At least, so it seems to
me. But perhaps your royal wisdom may explain."
"Devil!" said the king angrily, "Tribikram, who preserved her
bones, by that act placed himself in the position of her son;
therefore he could not marry her. Madhusadan, who, restoring her
to life, gave her life, was evidently a father to her; he could not,
then, become her husband. Therefore she was the wife of Baman,
who had collected her ashes." 
"I am happy to see, O king," exclaimed the Vampire, "that in spite
of my presentiments, we are not to part company just yet. These
little trips I hold to be, like lovers' quarrels, the prelude to closer
union. With your leave we will still practice a little suspension." 
And so saying, the Baital again ascended the tree, and was
suspended there.
"Would it not be better," thought the monarch, after recapturing
and shouldering the fugitive, "for me to sit down this time and
listen to the fellow's story? Perhaps the double exercise of walking
and thinking confuses me." 
With this idea Vikram placed his bundle upon the ground, well tied
up with turband and waistband; then he seated himself
cross-legged before it, and bade his son do the same.
The Vampire strongly objected to this measure, as it was contrary,
he asserted, to the covenant between him and the Raja. Vikram
replied by citing the very words of the agreement, proving that
there was no allusion to walking or sitting.
Then the Baital became sulky, and swore that he would not utter
another word. But he, too, was bound by the chain of destiny.
Presently he opened his lips, with the normal prelude that he was
about to tell a true tale.
       THE VAMPIRE'S SEVENTH STORY.
Showing the Exceeding Folly of Many Wise Fools.
The Baital resumed.
Of all the learned Brahmans in the learnedest university of Gaur
(Bengal) none was so celebrated as Vishnu Swami. He could write
verse as well as prose in dead languages, not very correctly, but
still, better than all his fellows--which constituted him a
distinguished writer. He had history, theosophy, and the four
Vedas of Scriptures at his fingers' ends, he was skilled in the
argute science of Nyasa or Disputation, his mind was a mine of
Pauranic or cosmogonico-traditional lore, handed down from the
ancient fathers to the modern fathers: and he had written bulky
commentaries, exhausting all that tongue of man has to say, upon
the obscure text of some old philosopher whose works upon ethics,
poetry, and rhetoric were supposed by the sages of Gaur to contain
the germs of everything knowable. His fame went over all the
country; yea, from country to country. He was a sea of excellent
qualities, the father and mother of Brahmans, cows, and women,
and the horror of loose persons, cut-throats, courtiers, and
courtesans. As a benefactor he was equal to Karna, most liberal of
heroes. In regard to truth he was equal to the veracious king
Yudhishtira.
True, he was sometimes at a loss to spell a common word in his
mother tongue, and whilst he knew to a fingerbreadth how many
palms and paces the sun, the moon, and all the stars are distant
from the earth, he would have been puzzled to tell you where the
region called Yavana[FN#119] lies. Whilst he could enumerate, in
strict chronological succession, every important event that
happened five or six million years before he was born, he was
profoundly ignorant of those that occurred in his own day. And
once he asked a friend seriously, if a cat let loose in the jungle
would not in time become a tiger.
Yet did all the members of alma mater Kasi, Pandits[FN#120] as
well as students, look with awe upon Vishnu Swami's livid cheeks,
and lack-lustre eyes, grimed hands and soiled cottons.
Now it so happened that this wise and pious Brahmanic peer had
four sons, whom he brought up in the strictest and most serious
way. They were taught to repeat their prayers long before they
understood a word of them, and when they reached the age of
four[FN#121] they had read a variety of hymns and spiritual
songs. Then they were set to learn by heart precepts that inculcate
sacred duties, and arguments relating to theology, abstract and
concrete.
Their father, who was also their tutor, sedulously cultivated, as all
the best works upon education advise, their implicit obedience,
humble respect, warm attachment, and the virtues and sentiments
generally. He praised them secretly and reprehended them openly,
to exercise their humility. He derided their looks, and dressed them
coarsely, to preserve them from vanity and conceit. Whenever they
anticipated a "treat," he punctually disappointed them, to teach
them self-denial. Often when he had promised them a present, he
would revoke, not break his word, in order that discipline might
have a name and habitat in his household. And knowing by
experience how much stronger than love is fear, he frequently
threatened, browbeat, and overawed them with the rod and the
tongue, with the terrors of this world, and with the horrors of the
next, that they might be kept in the right way by dread of falling
into the bottomless pits that bound it on both sides.
At the age of six they were transferred to the Chatushpati[FN#122]
or school. Every morning the teacher and his pupils assembled in
the hut where the different classes were called up by turns. They
laboured till noon, and were allowed only two hours, a moiety of
the usual time, for bathing, eating, sleep, and worship, which took
up half the period. At 3 P.M. they resumed their labours, repeating
to the tutor what they had learned by heart, and listening to the
meaning of it: this lasted till twilight. They then worshipped, ate
and drank for an hour: after which came a return of study,
repeating the day's lessons, till 10 P.M.
In their rare days of ease--for the learned priest, mindful of the
words of the wise, did not wish to dull them by everlasting work--
they were enjoined to disport themselves with the gravity and the
decorum that befit young Samditats, not to engage in night frolics,
not to use free jests or light expressions, not to draw pictures on
the walls, not to eat honey, flesh, and sweet substances turned acid,
not to talk to little girls at the well-side, on no account to wear
sandals, carry an umbrella, or handle a die even for love, and by no
means to steal their neighbours' mangoes.
As they advanced in years their attention during work time was
unremittingly directed to the Vedas. Wordly studies were almost
excluded, or to speak more correctly, whenever wordly studies
were brought upon the carpet, they were so evil entreated, that they
well nigh lost all form and feature. History became "The Annals of
India on Brahminical Principles," opposed to the Buddhistical;
geography "The Lands of the Vedas," none other being deemed
worthy of notice; and law, "The Institutes of Manu," then almost
obsolete, despite their exceeding sanctity.
But Jatu-harini[FN#123] had evidently changed these children
before they were born; and Shani[FN#124] must have been in the
ninth mansion when they came to light.
Each youth as he attained the mature age of twelve was formally
entered at the University of Kasi, where, without loss of time, the
first became a gambler, the second a confirmed libertine, the third
a thief, and the fourth a high Buddhist, or in other words an utter
atheist.
Here King Vikram frowned at his son, a hint that he had better not
behave himself as the children of highly moral and religious
parents usually do. The young prince understood him, and briefly
remarking that such things were common in distinguished
Brahman families, asked the Baital what he meant by the word
"Atheist."
Of a truth (answered the Vampire) it is most difficult to explain.
The sages assign to it three or four several meanings: first, one
who denies that the gods exist secondly, one who owns that the
gods exist but denies that they busy themselves with human
affairs; and thirdly, one who believes in the gods and in their
providence, but also believes that they are easily to be set aside.
Similarly some atheists derive all things from dead and
unintelligent matter; others from matter living and energetic but
without sense or will: others from matter with forms and qualities
generable and conceptible; and others from a plastic and
methodical nature. Thus the Vishnu Swamis of the world have
invested the subject with some confusion. The simple, that is to
say, the mass of mortality, have confounded that confusion by
reproachfully applying the word atheist to those whose opinions
differ materially from their own.
But I being at present, perhaps happily for myself, a Vampire, and
having, just now, none of these human or inhuman ideas, meant
simply to say that the pious priest's fourth son being great at
second and small in the matter of first causes, adopted to their
fullest extent the doctrines of the philosophical Buddhas.[FN#125]
Nothing according to him exists but the five elements, earth, water,
fire, air (or wind), and vacuum, and from the last proceeded the
penultimate, and so forth. With the sage Patanjali, he held the
universe to have the power of perpetual progression.[FN#126] He
called that Matra (matter), which is an eternal and infinite
principle, beginningless and endless. Organization, intelligence,
and design, he opined, are inherent in matter as growth is in a tree.
He did not believe in soul or spirit, because it could not be detected
in the body, and because it was a departure from physiological
analogy. The idea "I am," according to him, was not the
identification of spirit with matter, but a product of the mutation of
matter in this cloud-like, error-formed world. He believed in
Substance (Sat) and scoffed at Unsubstance (Asat). He asserted the
subtlety and globularity of atoms which are uncreate. He made
mind and intellect a mere secretion of the brain, or rather words
expressing not a thing, but a state of things. Reason was to him
developed instinct, and life an element of the atmosphere affecting
certain organisms. He held good and evil to be merely
geographical and chronological expressions, and he opined that
what is called Evil is mostly an active and transitive form of Good.
Law was his great Creator of all things, but he refused a creator of
law, because such a creator would require another creator, and so
on in a quasi-interminable series up to absurdity. This reduced his
law to a manner of haphazard. To those who, arguing against it,
asked him their favourite question, How often might a man after he
had jumbled a set of letters in a bag fling them out upon the ground
before they would fall into an exact poem? he replied that the
calculation was beyond his arithmetic, but that the man had only to
jumble and fling long enough inevitably to arrive at that end. He
rejected the necessity as well as the existence of revelation, and he
did not credit the miracles of Krishna, because, according to him,
nature never suspends her laws, and, moreover, he had never seen
aught supernatural. He ridiculed the idea of Mahapralaya, or the
great destruction, for as the world had no beginning, so it will have
no end. He objected to absorption, facetiously observing with the
sage Jamadagni, that it was pleasant to eat sweetmeats, but that for
his part he did not wish to become the sweetmeat itself. He would
not believe that Vishnu had formed the universe out of the wax in
his ears. He positively asserted that trees are not bodies in which
the consequences of merit and demerit are received. Nor would he
conclude that to men were attached rewards and punishments from
all eternity. He made light of the Sanskara, or sacrament. He
admitted Satwa, Raja, and Tama,[FN#127] but only as properties
of matter. He acknowledged gross matter (Sthulasharir), and
atomic matter (Shukshma-sharir), but not Linga-sharir, or the
archetype of bodies. To doubt all things was the foundation of his
theory, and to scoff at all who would not doubt was the
corner-stone of his practice. In debate he preferred logical and
mathematical grounds, requiring a categorical "because" in answer
to his "why?" He was full of morality and natural religion, which
some say is no religion at all. He gained the name of atheist by
declaring with Gotama that there are innumerable worlds, that the
earth has nothing beneath it but the circumambient air, and that the
core of the globe is incandescent. And he was called a practical
atheist--a worse form apparently--for supporting the following
dogma: "that though creation may attest that a creator has been, it
supplies no evidence to prove that a creator still exists." On which
occasion, Shiromani, a nonplussed theologian, asked him, "By
whom and for what purpose west thou sent on earth?" The youth
scoffed at the word "sent," and replied, "Not being thy Supreme
Intelligence, or Infinite Nihility, I am unable to explain the
phenomenon." Upon which he quoted--
              How sunk in darkness Gaur must be
              Whose guide is blind Shiromani!
At length it so happened that the four young men, having
frequently been surprised in flagrant delict, were summoned to the
dread presence of the university Gurus,[FN#128] who addressed
them as follows:--
"There are four different characters in the world: he who perfectly
obeys the commands; he who practices the commands, but follows
evil; he who does neither good nor evil; and he who does nothing
but evil. The third character, it is observed, is also an offender, for
he neglects that which he ought to observe. But ye all belong to the
fourth category."
Then turning to the elder they said:
"In works written upon the subject of government it is advised,
'Cut off the gambler's nose and ears, hold up his name to public
contempt, and drive him out of the country, that he may thus
become an example to others. For they who play must more often
lose than win; and losing, they must either pay or not pay. In the
latter case they forfeit caste, in the former they utterly reduce
themselves. And though a gambler's wife and children are in the
house, do not consider them to be so, since it is not known when
they will be lost.[FN#129] Thus he is left in a state of perfect
not-twoness (solitude), and he will be reborn in hell.' O young
man! thou hast set a bad example to others, therefore shalt thou
immediately exchange this university for a country life."
Then they spoke to the second offender thus :---
"The wise shun woman, who can fascinate a man in the twinkling
of an eye; but the foolish, conceiving an affection for her, forfeit in
the pursuit of pleasure their truthfulness, reputation, and good
disposition, their way of life and mode of thought, their vows and
their religion. And to such the advice of their spiritual teachers
comes amiss, whilst they make others as bad as themselves. For it
is said, 'He who has lost all sense of shame, fears not to disgrace
another; 'and there is the proverb, 'A wild cat that devours its own
young is not likely to let a rat escape; ' therefore must thou too, O
young man! quit this seat of learning with all possible expedition."
The young man proceeded to justify himself by quotations from
the Lila-shastra, his text-book, by citing such 1ines as--
              Fortune favours folly and force,
and by advising the elderly professors to improve their skill in the
peace and war of love. But they drove him out with execrations.
As sagely and as solemnly did the Pandits and the Gurus reprove
the thief and the atheist, but they did not dispense the words of
wisdom in equal proportions. They warned the former that petty
larceny is punishable with fine, theft on a larger scale with
mutilation of the hand, and robbery, when detected in the act, with
loss of life[FN#130]; that for cutting purses, or for snatching them
out of a man's waistcloth,[FN#131] 'the first penalty is chopping
off the fingers, the second is the loss of the hand, and the third is
death. Then they call him a dishonour to the college, and they said,
"Thou art as a woman, the greatest of plunderers; other robbers
purloin property which is worthless, thou stealest the best; they
plunder in the night, thou in the day," and so forth. They told him
that he was a fellow who had read his Chauriya Vidya to more
purpose then his ritual.[FN#132] And they drove him from the
door as he in his shamelessness began to quote texts about the four
approved ways of housebreaking, namely, picking out burnt
bricks, cutting through unbaked bricks, throwing water on a mud
wall, and boring one of wood with a centre-bit.
But they spent six mortal hours in convicting the atheist, whose
abominations they refuted by every possible argumentation: by
inference, by comparison, and by sounds, by Sruti and Smriti, i.e.,
revelational and traditional, rational and evidential, physical and
metaphysical, analytical and synthetical, philosophical and
philological, historical, and so forth. But they found all their
endeavours vain. "For," it is said, "a man who has lost all shame,
who can talk without sense, and who tries to cheat his opponent,
will never get tired, and will never be put down." He declared that
a non-ad was far more probable than a monad (the active
principle), or the duad (the passive principle or matter.) He
compared their faith with a bubble in the water, of which we can
never predicate that it does exist or it does not. It is, he said,
unreal, as when the thirsty mistakes the meadow mist for a pool of
water. He proved the eternity of sound.[FN#133] He impudently
recounted and justified all the villanies of the Vamachari or
left-handed sects. He told them that they had taken up an ass's load
of religion, and had better apply to honest industry. He fell foul of
the gods; accused Yama of kicking his own mother, Indra of
tempting the wife of his spiritual guide, and Shiva of associating
with low women. Thus, he said, no one can respect them. Do not
we say when it thunders awfully, "the rascally gods are dying!"
And when it is too wet, "these villain gods are sending too much
rain"? Briefly, the young Brahman replied to and harangued them
all so impertinently, if not pertinently, that they, waxing angry, fell
upon him with their staves, and drove him out of assembly.
Then the four thriftless youths returned home to their father, who
in his just indignation had urged their disgrace upon the Pandits
and Gurus, otherwise these dignitaries would never have resorted
to such extreme measures with so distinguished a house. He took
the opportunity of turning them out upon the world, until such time
as they might be able to show substantial signs of reform. "For," he
said, "those who have read science in their boyhood, and who in
youth, agitated by evil passions, have remained in the insolence of
ignorance, feel regret in their old age, and are consumed by the fire
of avarice." In order to supply them with a motive for the task
proposed, he stopped their monthly allowance But he added, if
they would repair to the neighbouring university of Jayasthal, and
there show themselves something better than a disgrace to their
family, he would direct their maternal uncle to supply them with
all the necessaries of food and raiment.
In vain the youths attempted, with sighs and tears and threats of
suicide, to soften the paternal heart. He was inexorable, for two
reasons. In the first place, after wondering away the wonder with
which he regarded his own failure, he felt that a stigma now
attached to the name of the pious and learned Vishnu Swami,
whose lectures upon "Management during Teens," and whose
"Brahman Young Man's Own Book," had become standard works.
Secondly, from a sense of duty, he determined to omit nothing that
might tend to reclaim the reprobates. As regards the monthly
allowance being stopped, the reverend man had become every year
a little fonder of his purse; he had hoped that his sons would have
qualified themselves to take pupils, and thus achieve for
themselves, as he phrased it, "A genteel independence"; whilst
they openly derided the career, calling it "an admirable provision
for the more indigent members of the middle classes." For which
reason he referred them to their maternal uncle, a man of known
and remarkable penuriousness.
The four ne'er-do-weals, foreseeing what awaited them at
Jayasthal, deferred it as a last resource; determining first to see a
little life, and to push their way in the world, before condemning
themselves to the tribulations of reform.
They tried to live without a monthly allowance, and notably they
failed; it was squeezing, as men say, oil from sand. The gambler,
having no capital, and, worse still, no credit, lost two or three
suvernas[FN#134] at play, and could not pay them; in consequence
of which he was soundly beaten with iron-shod staves, and was
nearly compelled by the keeper of the hell to sell himself into
slavery. Thus he became disgusted; and telling his brethren that
they would find him at Jayasthal, he departed, with the intention of
studying wisdom.
A month afterwards came the libertine's turn to be disappointed.
He could no longer afford fine new clothes; even a well-washed
coat was beyond his means. He had reckoned upon his handsome
face, and he had matured a plan for laying various elderly
conquests under contribution. Judge, therefore, his disgust when
all the women-- high and low, rich and poor, old and young, ugly
and beautiful--seeing the end of his waistcloth thrown empty over
his shoulder, passed him in the streets without even deigning a
look. The very shopkeepers' wives, who once had adored his
mustachio and had never ceased talking of his "elegant" gait,
despised him; and the wealthy old person who formerly supplied
his small feet with the choicest slippers, left him to starve. Upon
which he also in a state of repentance, followed his brother to
acquire knowledge.
"Am I not," quoth the thief to himself, "a cat in climbing, a deer in
running, a snake in twisting, a hawk in pouncing, a dog in
scenting?--keen as a hare, tenacious as a wolf, strong as a lion?--a
lamp in the night, a horse on a plain, a mule on a stony path, a boat
in the water, a rock on land[FN#135]?" The reply to his own
questions was of course affirmative. But despite all these fine
qualities, and notwithstanding his scrupulous strictness in
invocating the house-breaking tool and in devoting a due portion
of his gains to the gods of plunder,[FN#136] he was caught in a
store-room by the proprietor, who inexorably handed him over to
justice. As he belonged to the priestly caste,[FN#137] the fine
imposed upon him was heavy. He could not pay it, and therefore
he was thrown into a dungeon, where he remained for some time.
But at last he escaped from jail, when he made his parting bow to
Kartikeya,[FN#138] stole a blanket from one of the guards, and set
out for Jayasthal, cursing his old profession.
The atheist also found himself in a position that deprived him of all
his pleasures. He delighted in afterdinner controversies, and in
bringing the light troops of his wit to bear upon the unwieldy
masses of lore and logic opposed to him by polemical Brahma
=========
Rutherford v. Greene's heirs - Wikisource, the free online library
Rutherford v. Greene's heirs - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Rutherford v. Greene's heirs
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Rutherford v. Greene's heirs by John MarshallSyllabusrelated portals: Supreme Court of the United States.sister projects: Wikidata item.
665683Rutherford v. Greene's heirs — Syllabusby John Marshall
Court Documents
Opinion of the Court
United States Supreme Court15 U.S. 196Rutherford  v.  Greene's heirs
THIS was a bill in chancery, filed in the circuit court for the district of Tennessee, by the appellant, against the heirs of the late Major-General Greene.
Feb. 24th.
The cause was argued by Mr. Campbell and Mr. Harper, for the appellant, and by Mr. Law and Mr. Jones, for the appellees.
Mr. Chief Justice MARSHALL delivered the opinion of the court. 
Notes[edit]
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work of the United States federal government (see 17 U.S.C. 105).
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1333
Cached time: 20221017211907
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.067 seconds
Real time usage: 0.094 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 466/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 13881/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3298/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 7/100
Expensive parser function count: 0/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 0/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.026/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1460333/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%   73.669      1 -total
 74.76%   55.078      1 Template:Header
 14.98%   11.036      1 Template:PD-USGov
 13.13%    9.670      1 Template:License
  8.30%    6.114      1 Template:Header/main_block
  6.44%    4.747      1 Template:CaseCaption
  5.48%    4.037      1 Template:License_scope
  3.42%    2.518      1 Template:USSCcase
  3.27%    2.412      2 Template:Uc
  2.57%    1.893      1 Template:License_grammar
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:665683-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211907 and revision id 6723476.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Rutherford_v._Greene%27s_heirs&oldid=6723476"
Categories: United States Supreme Court decisionsUnited States Supreme Court decisions in Volume 15PD-USGovHidden categories: Pages with override authorCase missing lower courtCase missing argument dateCase missing decision dateCase missing case numberUncategorized United States Supreme Court decision
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 25 March 2017, at 10:31.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Presidential Radio Address - 27 June 1998 - Wikisource, the free online library
Presidential Radio Address - 27 June 1998 - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Presidential Radio Address - 27 June 1998
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
←Clinton's Presidential Radio Addresses
Presidential Radio Address  (1998)  by William Jefferson Clinton 
    sister projects: Wikidata item.
Weekly radio address delivered by U.S. President Bill Clinton on June 27, 1998.
11079Presidential Radio Address1998William Jefferson Clinton
Good morning. I'm speaking to you today from Beijing. In just 2 days, I've seen some of the rich history and remarkable changes that are taking place in China, home to nearly one quarter of the world's population.
China is the oldest civilization on Earth. In Xi'an, on Friday, I saw the old and the new China, from magnificent Terra Cotta Warriors sculpted by artisans 2000 years before America was founded to the beginnings of democracy in a nearby village where residents soon will hold elections.
I've been touched by the warm reception given to me, my family, and the Members of Congress traveling with us. Tens of thousands of Chinese families have lined the streets to greet us. For all these people, China is changing. I see cell phones, beepers, new office buildings.
China is no longer the same country it was when President Nixon first came here 26 years ago. Never before have so many Chinese had the opportunity to start businesses; lift their families out of poverty; choose where to live, work, and travel; and enjoy the fruits of their labors. But there's also resistance to change, the legacy of a history that has not always been kind to the Chinese people and has left a deeply rooted fear of instability.
Today in Beijing I am meeting with China's leaders to talk about the future of our two countries and a relationship between us that is essential to a peaceful, stable, and prosperous world in the next century. We talked about the United States and China's mutual interests: promoting peace in Korea, where 40,000 U.S. soldiers still risk their lives to patrol the cold war's last frontier; preventing a nuclear arms race between India and Pakistan; restoring economic stability in Asia; stopping the spread of nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons and the missiles to deliver them; combating international crime and drug trafficking; preserving the environment; and opening trade.
We also spoke frankly about our differences, especially concerning human rights. Over the past year, we have seen some progress in this area, though still far from enough. Some of China's famous political prisoners have been released, but others still languish in prison. The Government is loosening its control over many aspects of daily life, yet people still are not completely free to meet, to publish, to speak, to worship according to the dictates of their own hearts.
Throughout this trip, I will raise human rights and try to explain how freedom has been at the heart of America's success and prosperity. I will also argue that in this global information age, when economic success is built on ideas, personal freedom is necessary to the innovation and creativity that are essential to the greatness of any modern nation.
In dealing with China, we must stay true to a course that is both principled and pragmatic. We must continue to expand our areas of cooperation, even as we deal directly with our differences.
China is important to our future, with the largest population on Earth, a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council, an economy increasingly connected to our own. Without China, it will be difficult to face the challenges, successfully, that affect all of us. With China, we can build a safer, more prosperous future for our children, a world of unlimited possibility in the new century.
Thanks for listening.
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work of the United States federal government (see 17 U.S.C. 105).
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1399
Cached time: 20221017211907
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.049 seconds
Real time usage: 0.077 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 287/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 11149/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2876/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 0/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.023/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1451329/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%   63.141      1 -total
 84.63%   53.436      1 Template:Header
 15.24%    9.622      1 Template:PD-USGov
 15.15%    9.567      1 Template:Header/main_block
 13.37%    8.445      1 Template:License
  5.73%    3.621      1 Template:License_scope
  2.70%    1.706      1 Template:License_grammar
  2.32%    1.462      1 Template:Is_number
  1.61%    1.014      1 Template:W
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:11079-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211907 and revision id 4061779.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Presidential_Radio_Address_-_27_June_1998&oldid=4061779"
Categories: PD-USGovPresidential radio addresses of William Jefferson Clinton in 1998Hidden category: Pages with noyearcat
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 13 September 2012, at 23:28.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
The Diamond (Punshon) - Wikisource, the free online library
The Diamond (Punshon) - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
The Diamond (Punshon)
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
The Diamond  (1917)  by E. R. Punshoninformation about this edition. 
Extracted from Windsor magazine,  v. 45 1916-17, pp. 547-552.  Accompanying  illustration  by Frank Gillett omitted. A strange figure John Robson looked as he trudged across the veld, making for the track along which twice a week travelled the Kimberley coach. His dungaree trousers were torn and ragged, his flannel shirt grey with ancient dirt, […] His hair was long and matted, it was a week since he had shaved, and in the pocket of a wash-leather belt next his skin he bore a diamond worth a clear five thousand pounds or more. …
3328104The Diamond1917E. R. Punshon
THE DIAMOND 
By E. R. PUNSHON 
" ONCE a digger, always a digger," say the people of South Africa; and, again, "No man ever leaves the Vaal." But John Robson was very sure that he at least was going to be an exception to that general and well-proved rule. 
Never again would he return to the muddy waters of the great river, in the sands of which diamonds lay waiting for the finder; never again would he see the shabby little settlement by the river bank, with its roofs of corrugated iron, its stacks of empty tins, and its piles of derelict bottles; never again would he see the location on the hillside, or the boys working by the waterside. As for his claim, anyone who wanted it could have it. 
A strange figure he looked as he trudged across the veld, making for the track along which twice a week travelled the Kimberley coach. His dungaree trousers were torn and ragged, his flannel shirt grey with ancient dirt, his sombrero flapped on his forehead in ruins, his boots he had had to tie with bits of string to keep them on his feet. His hair was long and matted, it was a week since he had shaved, and in the pocket of a wash-leather belt next his skin he bore a diamond worth a clear five thousand pounds or more, such a stone as had not been found on the Vaal diggings within the memory of man. 
No one knew, not even his boys. He had seen it and picked it out himself. Not a soul had been near, and he had said not a word to anyone. Not likely. A stone like that one could sell to best advantage in Kimberley itself; the temptation would most likely be too much for the Jew dealers at the diggings, and they would cheat him badly over the business if he showed it to them. Besides, he hated them all so bitterly that he did not want to put such a good bit of business in their way. 
The morning after his great discovery he announced publicly that he was chucking the whole thing, and he sold all he possessed—which was little enough—for as much as enabled him to pay his boys their wages and clear off one or two debts he owed. For the claim itself no one would make an offer, and so he had left it for any to take up who liked, and, amid laughter and jeers and many prophecies that he would soon be back again, he started off on his tramp. 
The fools! How they had laughed! He could hear still their idiotic guffaws. Well, they would laugh to another tune when the Kimberley papers announced that Mr. John Robson, late of the Vaal diggings, had sold a diamond found on his claim for five thousand pounds, and would shortly be returning to England. 
He stood still and looked around cautiously, furtively. No one was in sight. The veld lay still and bare in the heat, as though that moment fresh and raw from the hands of the Creator. He permitted himself a peep at his treasure. An untrained eye would have passed it over, very likely, but, all the same, it was a diamond of the first water, and worth at least a clear five thousand pounds, probably more. 
The sight of it refreshed him like food and water, and the touch of it was like cool shade at noon. He laughed out aloud and walked on with renewed strength. Towards midday he came to a lonely farmhouse. They were English people, and, though the native boys looked at him askance, they gave him food, and let him eat it in the shade on the verandah. They did not ask him inside, which, perhaps, is no great wonder, and he did not know that he blamed them much. But in three months' time—— He smiled to himself as, his meal finished, he filled his broken old pipe with some native tobacco and began to smoke. In three months' time it would be Havana cigars. 
The farmer came round the corner of the house and looked at him with marked disfavour. It amused Robson to touch his dirty old sombrero and say "sir" to this man, and to speak in the whining tone of the professional tramp. One could do these things when one had in one's belt a diamond worth thousands of pounds. 
The farmer was a tall young fellow, neatly dressed, smart-looking, with a ruddy complexion. Robson guessed he had not been out long. Most likely he had sunk his petty capital of a few hundreds or so in this farm, and was expecting great things from it. Robson chuckled to think that he could buy up this young whipper-snapper, with his smart clothes and polished riding-boots, half a dozen times over. Meanwhile he touched his hat to him and called him "sir," and observed that he had been working at the Vaal diggings, and was now on his way to Kimberley.
"Had any luck?" asked the farmer carelessly. 
"Not much," answered Robson, hugging his secret knowledge to himself, "It's a trying sort of job." 
"It's a poor sort of way of earning a living," said the young farmer severely—"just like going to Monte Carlo on the chance of breaking the bank. I suppose the attraction is, the boys do all the work while you lie in the shade and watch them, and hope they'll bring off the big find they never do." 
"No, never," agreed Robson. "But I'm done with it," he added, with strange passion. 
"Glad to hear it," said the farmer, who held, for good reason, a poor opinion of the diamond diggers.  
He nodded and went off, and Robson watched him go, and hated him, if only for those polished riding-boots of his. Robson did not know that he had ever seen anything more offensive than the way in which those boots shone and twinkled. But very soon he would have shiny boots himself that shone and sparkled in the sun. 
Presently he made a start again, and as he went he heard one of the native boys make a jeering remark at which the others laughed. Robson flung so savage a curse at them that they shrank away, and suddenly the young farmer appeared again. 
"Come, none of that sort of talk here, my man!" he said. "You be off!" 
Robson eyed him viciously, but then turned and shambled off without speaking. The other's attitude had not invited discussion, and then why should he try to assert himself when he knew—he knew well—what was in the pocket of his wash-leather belt? 
He burst into sudden laughter of pure joy as he went, and thought of his hidden fortune, and when they heard him laughing like that, the native boys gave up the plan they had half formed of setting the dogs after him as soon as the master's back was turned. For plainly this ragged wanderer was mad, and therefore to be venerated and served in all ways possible, on account of the powerful and unknown spirit that had taken possession of him. 
Across the veld John Robson strode briskly on his way, and his thoughts were busy with his past and with his future. Destiny was a strange thing. It had made him its football all his life, and now had flung him a princely gift as one tosses a bare bone to a dog. He thought of his schoolboy days, the old classroom, the playing fields, the ancient elms over which one day, in a cricket match, he had driven a ball for six with a mighty drive that was talked of all the rest of the term. He wondered what had happened to the rest of the chaps. Some would be dead, he supposed, and some here and some there, and most would be snug citizens, going daily to their offices and returning at night to their comfortable villas situated in select residential districts, and he—well, he was here in rags, trudging across the veld with a fortune in his pocket. 
Life was a strange business. 
He remembered so well his first landing at Cape Town. He had had money in his pocket then, and he had enjoyed himself, and when the money came to an end, he had drifted from one thing to another, till he came at last to the muddy waters of the Vaal to grub for diamonds. 
And now he was leaving them with a fortune in his hand, and for pure joy he laughed out loud, alone there on the veld—a lone laughing figure in the midst of that great stretch of sun-baked desolation. 
He walked on, and his thoughts turned to London. He would be there in three months, and as he walked he made, as it were, a song to himself of all the old familiar names—Piccadilly and the Strand, Pall Mall and Leicester Square—he chanted them all to himself as a conqueror might chant the names of the victories he won in his youth. And he promised himself that, on the third monthly anniversary of the day of his great find, he would walk into the Savoy and order the best dinner there that money could buy. 
Towards sundown he came in sight of the place where the Kimberley coach stopped to change mules, and there, so well had he timed himself, was the coach in the distance, swinging down the road. 
The halting-place was known as Watson's, and was a trading store and canteen belonging to a big Afrikander named Watson, and suspected of having in his veins a strong dash of native blood. His huts were of mud with thatched roofs, and only one had a verandah. That was the largest hut, of which one end formed the canteen—the fittings of which consisted chiefly of packing-cases—and the other end the store, where tins of "bully" salmon and milk rusted on the walls, meal-bags leaked on the floor, and sides of bacon sweated through their muslin covers. Behind were the mule stables, and on one hand was the dining hut, where food for the approaching travellers was spread out in uninviting array. But then, as Mr. Watson remarked, the food didn't matter much, for no one ever wanted to eat, on getting off the coach—all that was wanted was drink and plenty of it. 
The coach drove up, the passengers descended to stretch their limbs, to look at as much of the food ready for them as was visible under the flies, and then to turn shuddering into the canteen to demand drink. They were nearly ready to start again, and the driver was casting a professional eye over his new team, when Robson came up.
"Hallo!" he said.  "Got any room? I'm bound for Kimberley." 
"You. are, are you?" said the driver coolly, and climbed into his seat. "Come from the diamond diggings, eh?" 
"Yes, I——" 
"You just about look it," said the driver thoughtfully—"you do that. I know your sort," he said, and expectorated with vigour. "You get sick of the game once in a while, and you think you'll do some honest work for a change, instead of lying about half drunk, watching your boys and hoping they will make a big find, which they never do. So off you go to town, and when you find you've got to work there, back you go to the river. Once a digger, always a digger." 
"Yes, I've heard that, too," agreed one of the passengers. "They always say that no man ever leaves the Vaal." 
"Well, I have," retorted Robson, smiling with a secret joy as his hand strayed towards the belt where he kept his hidden treasure, "and I want to get to Kimberley. Have you room?" 
"Reckon there's room all right, outside," said the driver, with some reluctance, "if you can pay your fare," he added. 
Robson hesitated. In his excitement and his consciousness of wealth, this was a difficulty he had never thought of, and, though he carried a fortune in his belt, he had not so much as one "ticky" in his pockets. 
'I—I——" he stammered, taken aback, and then he laughed, this obstacle seemed so foolish. "I'll pay you when I get to Kimberley," he said. 
"Thanks," retorted the driver, misunderstanding the other's laugh. "I've been had that way before, and I'm not taking any more, thanks all the same." 
Before Robson realised his purpose, he whipped up his mules. The coach, swaying and rattling, started off, bumping down the rough road. One or two of the passengers looked back at him curiously, one or two laughed, most of them took no notice. A spasm of rage and hatred took him. He had a mind to run after them, to force them to stop, to show them his great diamond, that would turn in a moment their indifference, their contempt, to envious admiration. He restrained himself abruptly. They were not worthy to see it. He would let them drive on, and they should only find out through the papers what folly they had been guilty of. He laughed aloud in scorn of them, and for joy of the secret that he held so closely. A voice near by said lazily—
"Glad you're amused, mister." 
He turned and saw a big, bearded, dark-complexioned man leaning against the door-post of the canteen. It was Watson, the owner of the place. He was watching Robson with a kind of good-natured contempt, and, jerking his head backwards, he said—
"Come on and have a drink." 
Robson followed him into the canteen. The air was heavy with the odour of stale spirits, the floor of beaten earth was a litter of burnt matches and cigarette ends. Watson poured out some whisky, and Robson drank it thirstily. 
"That's good," he said. "When's the next coach due?" 
"Day after to-morrow," answered Watson. He added presently: "They won't take you if you can't pay your fare." 
"They will fast enough if I want them to," retorted Robson. 
The hotel-keeper took no notice of what he thought a mere idle boast. 
"Gimme another drink," said Robson.
The other looked at him and yawned, and then laughed. 
"By gum, you've a cheek!" he said. "Let's see the colour of your money." 
Only by an effort did Robson resist his impulse to slam down his belt on the top of the packing-case that served for a bar counter. The sight of what it held would strike this grinning hotel-keeper as with lightning. But no, he would keep his secret still. No one should know till he reached Kimberley. These fools he hated so should only find out presently what it was they had missed. Without a word he turned and shambled out into the open, and sat down in the shade by the side of the hut. 
After a time Watson followed, and made a remark or two the other hardly answered. He slept that night in the mule stable. Strange accommodation, he thought to himself—as, with his secret and furtive joy, he felt again his hidden treasure—for a man worth some thousands of pounds. Here, in this cursed country, it was a heap of straw in a mule stable. But once back in London it would be a room at the Savoy. 
He hung about all next day, waiting for the coach. If necessary, he had made up his mind to show his treasure so as to secure a seat. But this hotel-keeper fellow—half-bred nigger that he was—should know nothing, nothing at all; that should be his punishment for his impudent indifference. 
That night he again slept in the mule stable. He had managed to get a little food, thrown to him by Watson, as one throws scraps to a dog, or shared with the Kaffir cook-boy. Watson had no special objection to his hanging about the place, nor did he grudge him the bit of food he obtained. He was always someone to talk to. Even the mere presence of another white man was a change and break in the eternal monotony of the veld. Besides, to send him off would have needed an effort, and effort was the one thing of which Watson was constitutionally incapable. And then, after all, the fellow did no harm, and was useful sometimes to help in odd jobs.
As the second day drew on, Robson's agitation became extreme. His mind was full of Kimberley and the lighted streets, of good food and clean living, of the well-dressed, bustling crowds, and the respectful excitement he would cause when at last he flashed upon a deferential world the great diamond he kept hidden so securely. 
Watson watched his excitement with increasing amusement. The hotel-keeper was by no means an ill-natured man, but some demon of mischief entered into his brain that day, and an hour before the coach was due he offered Robson a drink. Robson, his throat dry and parched, accepted with avidity, and Watson gave him another, and then another that was almost raw spirit. 
When the coach arrived, Robson was snoring dead drunk on a heap of straw in the mule stable, where Watson, who had forgotten all about him, found him the next morning. 
"Hey, you, you are a beaut!" he said, stirring the sleeping man with his foot. 
Robson grunted and sat up. His head ached abominably, he felt really ill, sick, and dazed. It was some time before he realised that he had missed the coach, and when he did he felt too bad to say much. 
"When's the next one?" he asked. 
Watson laughed. 
"You're a sticker, ain't you?" he said. "There's three a week—the next on Tuesday." 
But he did not tell him that the Tuesday coach came in the morning, not in the late afternoon, as the other two did. 
There was nothing for it but to wait, for he knew he was not strong enough to make the journey on foot; and till Tuesday he hung about the place, doing an occasional odd job, getting in return food enough to keep him alive, and sometimes a drink. On the Tuesday morning one of the goats was missing, and Watson asked him to go and look for it. 
"It'll have strayed over behind the kopje there," he said, "and I'd hate the hyenas to get it, if they haven't already. Don't be long." 
Robson, who was growing very excited again, was willing enough to undertake the little errand. It would help to pass the interval of waiting, and the hotel-keeper could not do less on his return than stand a drink. Robson felt no desire for food, but it was as though a fire consumed him within. More than once, to get fresh drink, he had been tempted to show his hidden treasure, and only his hatred of Watson and fierce determination to keep his secret still had prevented him from doing so. He was a little afraid he was in for a touch of fever, for at times he felt quite light-headed. But that would be all right once he got to Kimberley, and could have proper food and lodging and attention. 
So he went off, with one of the native boys to help him, and they returned with the missing animal about noon, to learn that the coach had come and gone during their absence. 
"I told you not to be long," observed Watson indifferently. 
The other made no reply. He felt too overwhelmed. It had come into his mind suddenly that he would never get to Kimberley, that somehow or another he would always be prevented. Watson said lazily: 
"I'm glad you found that goat. Come and have a drink. What are you in such an all-fired hurry to get to Kimberley for, anyway?" 
"That's my affair," said the other, greedily emptying his glass. 
"Secret,  eh?" said Watson, amused. "Will you tell me for another go of whisky?" 
"No," answered Robson, with flaming eyes. "No, not if telling you were the only way to save you from slow death!" 
The hotel-keeper, more amused than ever, laughed outright. He thought it very comical to see how this outcast vagabond drew himself up, with flashing eyes and head erect, as though he were any man's equal. 
"You shall have your drink, anyway," he said, pouring it out, "and next time I'll see you are around when the coach comes; but I don't say they'll take you on if you can't pay your fare." 
"If I held out my hand like that," said Robson, with a sweeping gesture, "the driver would turn all the other passengers out to make room for me!" 
He turned and strode out of the place, and Watson looked after him smilingly. 
"Crazed, poor brute!" he said to himself. And later on he said to him: "If you like to give up your Kimberley notion, you can stay around here. You can build a hut for yourself, and I dare say I can always make you useful enough to pay your keep." 
"You—you make me useful!" cried Robson, flaming into sudden anger. "You dare suggest my staying on in this hole, that isn't fit for a mangy dog or a blind jackal! You make me useful, you pay my keep! This place may be good enough for your Kaffir boys and for you, who aren't much different; but for me—me——"
It was the reference to his supposed strain of native blood that made Watson so angry, otherwise what he took for the other's idle boasting would only have amused him. But now he went very pale beneath his tan, and said angrily—
"All right. If I ain't good enough for you, you clear out as soon as you like!" 
And he gave orders to the boys to turn Robson off the place, and to let him have nothing that he did not pay for.  
The boys did not take the orders very seriously, and. they made no attempt to interfere with Robson in the mule stable, to which he had retired. They understood it only meant that the two white men had quarrelled, and they supposed that soon they would be friends again, and most likely getting drunk together. 
But Robson stayed sulkily in the stable. One reason for this was that his legs felt queer, and that he had some difficulty in walking. Besides, he was determined to ask for nothing, to accept nothing from the hotel-keeper. His revenge would be all the greater when the coach arrived, and he would display his secret treasure, and depart for Kimberley in a blaze of glory, leaving a crushed and humbled Watson to regret vainly and for ever his treatment of the stranger so wealthy beneath his rags. Watson almost forgot him next day, and when one of the boys told him that the strange white man was in the mule stable, lying on a heap of straw, he said carelessly—
"Well, let him stop there. If he wants anything, he can come out and ask for it." 
But John Robson, potential rich man, owner of the biggest diamond South Africa had produced for ever so long, was not going to ask for anything from the man who had insulted him. 
He hugged his wrath more than did Watson, who by the time the next coach arrived had quite forgotten it. 
"Bill," he said to the driver, "there's a poor, half-crazed fool been hanging round here the last few days, dead set on getting to Kimberley. He can't pay his fare, but how would it be if you gave him a lift? You ain't such a big load to-day." 
"What's he want to go to Kimberley for?"  asked the driver. 
"Oh, just some fool-crazed notion he's got," answered the hotel-keeper. "Anyhow, he can go into hospital there—it's the only place he's fit for." 
"Right O, I'll take him along," said the driver. "Nothing infectious, I suppose?" 
"Oh, no," answered Watson. "Come and have a drink, and I'll send one of the boys to rout him out." 
They went into the canteen together, but the boy they had sent to the mule stable came back quickly, looking very scared. 
"He's dead," he said, "dead, for sure!" 
Watson swore comprehensively. The driver suggested they had better go and have a look for themselves. They did so, and found the boy had spoken truly. Excitement, lack of food, too much bad whisky, and general weakness, had had their effect, and John Robson lay dead on the straw, a happy smile on his face, for he had died dreaming that he was in the act of alighting at the Savoy, with deferential waiters bowing before him, and the manager smiling a welcome in the background. 
"Wonder what made him pop off that way?" said Watson, uneasily conscious of his order that the dead man was to have nothing that he did not pay for. 
He was quite voluble in his explanations, that did not interest the driver in the least; but he promised to inform the Mounted Police, to save Watson the trouble of sending off a boy to notify them. 
When the coach had gone, Watson went back into the stable. The body would have to be removed, and it had occurred to him that he might as well go through the pockets and see if there was anything in them. As he expected, there was nothing at all; but he noticed the belt round the dead man's waist, and he took it off. It seemed a good one, and might be useful, and would be as well with him as with the police. He flung it down, and went out to get two of the boys to remove the body, and when he came back he was just in time to see one of the mules busy eating the belt. The animal had had two great mouthfuls out of the middle already, and quite ruined it. Watson cursed a little and hit the mule, and flung the belt away. Later a prowling hyena found it and ate  it. And now, whether the Kimberley coach is drawn by a mule with a five-thousand-pound diamond inside it, or whether that diamond, is in the interior of one of the hyenas Watson can hear howling by night, is a problem that troubles neither him nor anyone else, since no one knows anything about it. 
Copyright, 1917, by E. R. Punshon, in the United States of America
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published before January 1, 1927.
The author died in 1965, so this work is also in the public domain in countries and areas where the copyright term is the author's life plus 50 years or less. This work may also be in the public domain in countries and areas with longer native copyright terms that apply the rule of the shorter term to foreign works.
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1319
Cached time: 20221017211908
Cache expiry: 86400
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.126 seconds
Real time usage: 0.176 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 771/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 36603/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4751/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 2776/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.043/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1762170/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  154.611      1 -total
 47.48%   73.405      1 Template:Header
 14.34%   22.167      1 Template:Center
  9.48%   14.652      1 Template:PD/US
  8.86%   13.693      1 Template:Header/main_block
  8.74%   13.520      4 Template:Bar
  7.43%   11.481      1 Template:PD-old-50-US
  7.05%   10.902      1 Template:Di
  6.57%   10.151      5 Template:Nowrap
  6.00%    9.275      1 Template:PD-old/US
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:3328104-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211908 and revision id 11726732.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=The_Diamond_(Punshon)&oldid=11726732"
Categories: 1917 worksShort storiesMysteryShort stories in periodicalsPD-old-50-USHidden category: Works using categories parameter
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this page
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 26 September 2021, at 08:22.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Republic Act No. 8749 - Wikisource, the free online library
Republic Act No. 8749 - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Republic Act No. 8749
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
←RA 8748
Republic Act No. 8749  (1998)  Republic of the PhilippinesEleventh Congress, First Regular SessionRA 8750→
related portals: Philippines, Legislative documents.sister projects: Wikipedia article, travel guide, Wikidata item.
1547493Republic Act No. 8749 — Eleventh Congress, First Regular Session1998Republic of the Philippines
S.  No.  1255
H.  No.  6216
Republic of the Philippines
Congress of the Philippines
Metro Manila
Eleventh Congress
First Regular Session
Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday,  the twenty-seventh
day of  July,  nineteen hundred and ninety eight.
[REPUBLIC  ACT  NO.  8749]
AN ACT PROVIDING FOR A COMPREHENSIVE 
AIR POLLUTION CONTROL POLICY AND
AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES
Be  it enacted by the Senate  and House  of  Representatives  of  thePhilippines in Congress assembled:
Contents
1 Chapter 1- General Provisions
1.1 Article 1- Basic Air Quality Policies
1.2 Article 2- Definition of Terms
2 Chapter 2- Air Quality Management System
2.1 Article 1- General Provisions
2.2 Article 2- Air Pollution Clearances And Permits For Stationary Sources
2.3 Article 3- Pollution From Stationary Sources
2.4 Article 4 -Pollution From Motor Vehicles
2.5 Article 5 -Pollution From Other Sources
3 Chapter 3 -Fuels, Additives, Substances And Pollutants
3.1 Article 1 -Fuels, Additives And Substances
3.2 Article 2 -Other Pollutants
4 Chapter 4 -Institutional Mechanism
5 Chapter 5 -Actions
6 Chapter 6 -Fines And Penalties
7 Chapter 7 -Final Provisions
Chapter 1- General Provisions[edit]
Article 1- Basic Air Quality Policies[edit]
SECTION 1.  Short Title. – This act shall be known as Philippine "Clean Air Act of 1999".
SECTION 2. Declaration of Principles. - The State shall protect and advance the right of the people to a balanced and healthful ecology in accord with the rhythm and harmony of nature.
The State shall promote and protect the global environment to attain sustainable development while recognizing the primary responsibility of local government units to deal with environmental problems.
The State recognizes that the responsibility of cleaning the habitat and environment is primarily area-based. The State also recognizes the principle that "polluters must pay". Finally, the State recognizes that a clean and healthy environment is for the good of all and should therefore be the concern of all.
SECTION 3. Declaration of Policies. - The State shall pursue a policy of balancing development and environmental protection. To achieve this end, the framework for sustainable development shall be pursued. It shall be the policy of the State to:
(a) Formulate a holistic national program of air pollution management that shall be implemented by the government through proper delegation and effective coordination of functions and activities;
(b) Encourage cooperation and self-regulation among citizens and industries though the application of market-based instruments;
(c) Focus primarily on pollution prevention rather than on control and provide for a comprehensive management program for air pollution;
(d) Promote public information and education to encourage the participation of an informed and active public in air quality planning and monitoring; and
(e) Formulate and enforce a system of accountability for short and long-term adverse environmental impact of a project, program or activity. This shall include the setting up of a funding or guarantee mechanism for clean-up and environmental rehabilitation and compensation for personal damages.
SECTION 4. Declaration of Rights. – Pursuant to the above-declared principles, the following rights of citizens are hereby sought to be recognized and the State shall seek to guarantee their enjoyment:
(a) The right to breathe clean air;
(b) The right to utilize and enjoy all natural resources according to the principle of sustainable development;
(c) The right to participate in the formulation, planning, implementation and monitoring of environmental policies and programs and in the decision-making process;
(d) The right to participate in the decision-making process concerning development policies, plans and programs projects or activities that may have adverse impact on the environment and public health;
(e) The right to be informed of the nature and extent of the potential hazard of any activity, undertaking or project and to be served timely notice of any significant rise in the level of pollution and the accidental or deliberate release into the atmosphere of harmful or hazardous substances;
(f) The right of access to public records which a citizen may need to exercise his or her rights effectively under this Act;
(g) The right to bring action in court or quasi- judicial bodies to enjoin all activities in violation of environmental laws and regulations, to compel the rehabilitation and cleanup of affected area, and to seek the imposition of penal sanctions against violators of environmental laws; and
(h) he right to bring action in court for compensation of personal damages resulting from the adverse environmental and public health impact of a project or activity.
Article 2- Definition of Terms[edit]
SECTION 5. Definitions. - As used in this Act:
(a) "Air pollutant" means any matter found in the atmosphere other than oxygen, nitrogen, water vapor, carbon dioxide, and the inert gases in their natural or normal concentrations, that is detrimental to health or the environment, which includes but not limited to smoke, dust, soot, cinders, fly ash, solid particles of any kind, gases, fumes, chemical mists, steam and radio-active substances;
(b) "Air pollution" means any alteration of the physical, chemical and biological properties of the atmospheric air, or any discharge thereto of any liquid, gaseous or solid substances that will or is likely to create or to render the air resources of the country harmful, detrimental, or injurious to public health, safety or welfare or which will adversely affect their utilization for domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate purposes;
(c) "Ambient air quality guideline values" mean the concentration of air over specified periods classified as short-term and long-term which are intended to serve as goals or objectives for the protection of health and/or public welfare. These values shall be used for air quality management purposes such as determining time trends, evaluating stages of deterioration or enhancement of the air quality, and in general, used as basis for taking positive action in preventing, controlling, or abating air pollution;
(d) "Ambient air quality" means the general amount of pollution present in a broad area; and refers to the atmosphere's average purity as distinguished from discharge measurements taken at the source of pollution;
(e) "Certificate of Conformity" means a certificate issued by the Department of Environment and Natural Resources to a vehicle manufacturer/assembler or importer certifying that a particular new vehicle or vehicle type meets the requirements provided under this Act and its rules and regulations;
(f) "Department" means the Department of Environment and Natural Resources;
(g) "Eco-profile" means the geographical-based instrument for planners and decision-makers which present an evaluation of the environmental quality and carrying capacity of an area. It is the result of the integration of primary and secondary data and information on natural resources and anthropogenic activities on the land which are evaluated by various environmental risk assessment and forecasting methodologies that enable the Department to anticipate the type of development control necessary in the planning area;
(h) "Emission" means any air contaminant, pollutant, gas stream or unwanted sound from a known source which is passed into the atmosphere;
(i) "Greenhouse gases" mean those gases that can potentially or can reasonably be expected to induce global warming, which include carbon dioxide, methane, oxides of nitrogen, chorofluorocarbons, and the like;
(j) "Hazardous substances" mean those substances which present either: (1) short-term acute hazards such as acute toxicity by ingestion, inhalation, or skin absorption, corrosivity or other skin or eye contact hazard or the risk of fire explosion; or (2) long-term toxicity upon repeated exposure, carcinogenicity (which in some cases result in acute exposure but with a long latent period), resistance to detoxification process such as biodegradation, the potential to pollute underground or surface waters;
(k) "Infectious waste" means that portion of medical waste that could transmit an infectious disease;
(l) "Medical waste" means the materials generated as a result of patient diagnosis, treatment, or immunization of human beings or animals;
(m) "Mobile source" means any vehicle propelled by or through combustion of carbon-based or other fuel, constructed and operated principally for the conveyance of persons or the transportation of property or goods;
(n) "Motor vehicle" mean any vehicle propelled by a gasoline or diesel engine or by any other than human or animal power, constructed and operated principally for the conveyance of persons or the transportation of property or goods in a public highway or street open to public use;
(o) "Municipal waste" means the waste materials generated from communities within a specific locality;
(p) "New vehicle" means a vehicle constructed entirely from new parts that has never been sold or registered with the DOTC or with the appropriate agency or authority, and operated on the highways of the Philippines, any foreign state or country;
(q) "Octane Rating or the Anti-Knock Index (AKI)" means the rating of the antiknock characteristics of a grade or type of automotive gasoline as determined by dividing by two (2) the sum of the Research Octane Number (RON), plus the Motor Octane Number (MON); the octane requirement, with respect to automotive gasoline for use in a motor vehicle or a class thereof, whether imported, manufactured, or assembled by a manufacturer, shall refer to the minimum octane rating of such automotive gasoline which such manufacturer recommends for the efficient operation of such motor vehicle, or a substantial portion of such class, without knocking;
(r) "Ozone Depleting Substances (ODS)" mean those substances that significantly deplete or otherwise modify the ozone layer in a manner that is likely to result in adverse effects on human health and the environment such as, but not limited to, chlorofluorocarbons, halons, and the like;
(s) "Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs)" mean the organic compounds that persist in the environment, bioaccumulate through the food web, and pose a risk of causing adverse effects to human health and the environment. These compounds resist photolytic, chemical and biological degradation, which shall include but not be limited to dioxin, furan, Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs), organochlorine pesticides, such as aldrin, dieldrin, DDT, hexachlorobenzene, lindane, toxaphere and  chlordane;
(t) "Poisonous and toxic fumes" mean any emissions and fumes which are beyond internationally-accepted standards, including but not limited to World Health Organization (WHO) guideline values;
(u) "Pollution control device" means any device or apparatus used to prevent, control or abate the pollution of air caused by emissions from identified pollution sources at levels within the air pollution control standard established by the Department;
(v) "Pollution control technology" means the pollution control devices, production processes, fuel combustion processes or other means that effectively prevent or reduce emissions or effluent;
(w) "Standard of performance" means a standard for emissions of air pollutant which reflects the degree of emission limitation achievable through the application of the best system of emission reduction, taking into account the cost of  achieving such reduction and any non-air quality health and environmentalimpact and energy requirement which the Department determines, and adequately demonstrates; and
(x) "Stationary source" means any building or immobile structure, facility or installation which emits or may emit any air pollutant.
Chapter 2- Air Quality Management System[edit]
Article 1- General Provisions[edit]
SECTION 6. Air Quality Monitoring and Information Network. – The Department shall prepare an annual National Air Quality Status Report which shall be used as the basis in formulating the Integrated Air Quality Improvement Framework, as provided for in Section 7. The said report shall include, but shall not be limited to the following:
(a) Extent of pollution in the country, per type of pollutant and per type of source, based on reports of the Department's monitoring stations;
(b) Analysis and evaluation of the current state, trends and projections of air pollution at the various levels provided herein;
(c) Identification of critical areas, activities, or projects which will need closer monitoring or regulation;
(d) Recommendations for necessary executive and legislative action; and
(e) Other pertinent qualitative and quantitative information concerning the extent of air pollution and the air quality performance rating of industries in the country.
The Department, in cooperation with the National Statistical Coordination Board (NSCB), shall design and develop an information network for data storage, retrieval and exchange.
The Department shall serve as the central depository of all data and information related to air quality.
SECTION 7. Integrated Air Quality Improvement Framework. - The Department shall, within six (6) months after the effectivity of this Act, establish, with the participation of LGUs, NGOs, POs, the academe and other concerned entities from the private sector, formulate and implement the Integrated Air Quality Improvement Framework
for a comprehensive air pollution management and control program. The framework shall, among others, prescribe the emission reduction goals using permissible standards, control strategies and control measures to be undertaken within a specified time period, including cost-effective use of economic incentives, management strategies, collective action, and
environmental education and information.
The Integrated Air Quality Improvement Framework shall be adopted as the official blueprint with which all government agencies must comply with to attain and maintain ambient air quality standards.
SECTION 8. Air Quality Control Action Plan. - Within six (6) months after the formulation of the framework, the Department shall, with public participation, formulate and implement an air quality control action plan consistent with Section 7 of this Act. The action plan shall:
(a) Include enforceable emission limitations and other control measures, means or techniques, as well as schedules and time tables for compliance, as may be necessary or appropriate to meet the applicable requirements of this Act;
(b) Provide for the establishment and operation of appropriate devices, methods, systems and procedures necessary to monitor, compile and analyze data on ambient air quality;
(c) Include a program to provide for the following: (1) enforcement of the measures described in the subparagraph (a); (2) regulation of the modification and construction of any stationary source within the areas covered by the plan, in accordance with land use policy to ensure that ambient air quality standards are achieved;
(d) Contain adequate provisions, consistent with the provisions of this Act, prohibiting any source or other types of emissions activity within the country from emitting any air pollutant in amounts which will significantly contribute to the nonattainment or will interfere with the maintenance by the Department of any such ambient air quality standard required to be included in the implementation plan to prevent significant deterioration of air quality or to protect visibility;
(e) Include control strategies and control measures to be undertaken within a specified time period, including cost-effective use of economic incentives, management strategies, collection action, and environmental education and information;
(f) Designate airsheds; and
(g) All other measures necessary for the effective control and abatement of air pollution.
The adoption of the plan shall clarify the legal effects on the financial, manpower and budgetary resources of the affected government agencies, and on the alignment of their programs with the plans.
In addition to direct regulations, the plan shall be characterized by a participatory approach to the pollution problem. The involvement of private entities in the monitoring and testing of emissions from mobile and/or stationary sources shall be considered.
Likewise, the LGUs, with the assistance from the Department, shall prepare and develop an action plan consistent with the Integrated Air Quality Improvement Framework to attain and maintain the ambient air quality standards within their respective airsheds as provided in Section 9 hereof.
The local government units shall develop and submit to the Department a procedure for carrying out the action plan for their jurisdiction. The Department, however, shall maintain its authority to independently inspect the enforcement procedure adopted. The Department shall have the power to closely supervise all or parts of the air quality action plan until such
time the local government unit concerned can assume the function to enforce the standards set by the Department.
A multi-sectoral monitoring team with broad public representation shall be convened by the Department for each LGU to conduct periodic inspections of air pollution sources to assess compliance with the emission limitations contained in their permits.
SECTION 9. Airsheds. – Pursuant to Section 8 of this Act, the designation of airsheds shall be on the basis of, but not limited to, areas with similar climate, meteorology and topology which affect the interchange and diffusion of pollutants in the atmosphere, or areas which share common interest or face similar development programs, prospects or
problems.
For a more effective air quality management, a system of planning and coordination shall be established and a common action plan shall be formulated for each airshed.
To effectively carry out the formulated action plans, a Governing Board is hereby created, hereinafter referred to as the Board.
The Board shall be headed by the Secretary of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources as chairman. The members shall be as follows:
a) Provincial Governors from areas belonging to the airshed;
b) City/Municipal Mayors from areas belonging to the airshed;
c) A representative from each concerned government agency;
d) Representatives from people's organizations;
e) Representatives from nongovernment organizations; and
f) Representatives from the private sector.
The Board shall perform the following functions:
a) Formulation of policies;
b) Preparation of a common action plan;
c) Coordination of functions among its members; and
d) Submission and publication of an annual Air Quality Status Report for each airshed.
Upon consultation with appropriate local government authorities, the Department shall, from time to time, revise the designation of airsheds utilizing eco-profiling techniques and undertaking scientific studies.
Emissions trading may be allowed among pollution sources within an airshed.
SECTION 10. Management of Nonattainment Areas. - The Department shall designate areas where specific pollutants have already exceeded ambient standards as nonattainment areas. The Department shall prepare and implement a program that will prohibit new sources of exceeded air pollutant without a corresponding reduction in existing sources.
In coordination with other appropriate government agencies, the LGUs shall prepare and implement a program and other measures including relocation, whenever necessary, to protect the health and welfare of residents in the area.
For those designated as nonattainment areas, the Department after consultation with local government authorities, nongovernment organizations (NGOs), people's organizations (POs) and concerned sectors may revise the designation of such areas and expand its coverage to cover larger areas depending on the condition of the areas.
SECTION 11. Air Quality Control Techniques. - Simultaneous with the issuance of the guideline values and standards, the Department, through the research and development program contained in this Act and upon consultation with the appropriate advisory committees, government agencies and LGUs, shall issue, and from time to time, revise information on air pollution control techniques. Such information shall include:
(a) Best available technology and alternative methods of prevention, management and control of air pollution
(b) Best available technology economically achievable which shall refer to the technological basis/standards for emission limits applicable to existing, direct industrial emitters of non-conventional and toxic pollutants; and
(c) Alternative fuels, processes and operating methods which will result in the elimination or significant reduction of emissions.
Such information may also include data relating to the cost of installation and operation, energy requirements, emission reduction benefits, and environmental impact or the emission control technology.
The issuance of air quality guideline values, standards and information on air quality control techniques shall be made available to the general public: Provided, That the issuance of information on air quality control techniques shall not be construed as requiring the purchase of certain pollution control devices by the public.
SECTION 12. Ambient Air Quality Values and Standards. – TheDepartment, in coordination with other concerned agencies, shall review and/or revise and publish annually a list of hazardous air pollutants with corresponding ambient guideline values and/or standard necessary to protect public health and safety, and general welfare. The initial list and values of the hazardous air pollutants shall be as follows:
a) For National Ambient Air Quality Guideline for Criteria Pollutants
Short Terma
Long Termb
Pollutants
μg/NCM
ppm
Averaging Time
μg/NCM
ppm
Averaging Time
Suspended Particulate Matterc -TSP
230d
24 hours
90
--
1 yearc
Suspended Particulate Matter -PM-10
150f
24 hours
60
--
1 yeare
Sulfur Dioxidec
180
0.07
24 hours
80
0.03
1 year
Nitrogen Dioxide
150
0.08
24 hours
--
--
--
Photochemical Oxidants
140
0.07
1 hour
--
--
--
As Ozone
60
0.03
8 hours
--
--
--
Carbon Monoxide
35 mg/NCM
30
1 hour
--
--
--
10 mg/NCM
9
8 hours
--
--
--
a^ Maximum limits represented by ninety-eight percentile (98%) values not to be exceeded more than once a year.
b^ Arithmetic mean.
c^ ^ ^ SO2 and Suspended Particulate Matter are sampled once every six days when using the manual methods. A minimum of twelve sampling days per quarter or forty-eight sampling days each year is required for these methods. Daily sampling may be done in the future once continuous analyzers are procured and become available.
d^ Limits for Total Suspended Particulate Matter with mass median diameter less than 25-50 µm.
e^ Annual Geometric Mean.
f^ Provisional limits for Suspended Particulate Matter with mass median diameter less than 10 microns and below until sufficient monitoring data are gathered to base a proper guideline.
g Evaluation of this guideline is carried out for 24-hour averaging time and averaged over three moving calendar months. The monitored average value for any three months shall not exceed the guideline value.
b) For National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Source Specific Air Pollutants from Industrial Sources/Operations:
Concentration2
Pollutants1
μg/NCM
ppm
Averaging Time (min.)
Method of Analysis/Measurement3
1.
Ammonia
200
0.28
30
Nesslerization/Indo Phenol
2.
Carbon Disulphide
30
0.01
30
Tischer Method
3.
Chlorine and Chlorine compounds expressed as Cl2
100
0.03
5
Methyl Orange
4.
Formaldehyde
50
0.04
30
Chromotropic acid Method or MBTH Colorimetric Method
5.
Hydrogen Chloride
200
0.13
30
Volhard Titration with Iodine Solution
6.
Hydrogen Sulfide
100
0.07
30
Methylene Blue
7.
Lead
20
30
AASc
8.
Nitrogen Dioxide
375
0.20
30
Greiss-Saltzman
260
0.14
60
9.
Phenol
100
0.03
30
4-Aminoantiphyrine
10.
Sulfur Dioxide
470
0.18
30
Colorimetric-Pararosaniline
340
0.13
60
11.
Suspended Particulate Matter - TSP
300
--
60
Gravimetric
Suspended Particulate Matter - PM10
200
--
60
-do-
1^  Pertinent ambient standards for Antimony, Arsenic, Cadmium, Asbestos, Nitric Acid and Sulfuric Acid Mists in the 1978 NPCC Rules and Regulations may be considered as guides in determining compliance.
2^  Ninety-eight percentile (98%) values of 30-minute sampling measured at 25°C and one
atmosphere pressure.
3^  Other equivalent methods approved by the Department may be used.
The basis in setting up the ambient air quality guideline values and standards shall reflect, among others, the latest scientific knowledge including information on:
a) Variable factors, including atmospheric conditions, which of themselves or in combination with other factors may alter the effects on public health or welfare of such air pollutant;
b) The other types of air pollutants which may interact with such pollutant to produce an adverse effect on public health or welfare; and
c) The kind and extent of all identifiable effects on public health or welfare which may be expected from the presence of such pollutant in the ambient air, in varying quantities.
The Department shall base such ambient air quality standards on World Health Organization (WHO) standards, but shall not be limited to nor be less stringent than such standards.
SECTION 13. Emission Charge System. - The Department, in case of industrial dischargers, and the Department of Transportation and Communications (DOTC), in case of motor vehicle dischargers, shall, based on environmental techniques, design, impose on and collect regular emission fees from said dischargers as part of the emission permitting system or vehicle registration renewal system, as the case may be. The system shall encourage the industries, and motor vehicles to abate, reduce, or prevent pollution. The basis of the fees include, but is not limited to, the volume and toxicity of any emitted pollutant. Industries, which shall install pollution control devices or retrofit their existing facilities with mechanisms that reduce pollution shall be entitled to tax incentives such as but not limited to tax credits and/or accelerated depreciation deductions.
SECTION 14. Air Quality Management Fund. – An Air Quality Management Fund to be administered by the Department as a special account in the National Treasury is hereby established to finance containment, removal, and clean-up operations of the Government in air pollution cases, guarantee restoration of ecosystems and rehabilitate areas affected by the acts of violators of this Act, to support research, enforcement and monitoring activities and capabilities of the relevant agencies, as well as to provide technical assistance to the relevant agencies. Such fund may likewise be allocated per airshed for the undertakings herein stated.
The Fund shall be sourced from the fines imposed and damages awarded to the Republic of the Philippines by the Pollution Adjudication Board (PAB), proceeds of licenses and permits issued by the Department under this Act, emission fees and from donations, endowments and grants in the forms of contributions. Contributions to the Fund shall be exempted from donor taxes and all other taxes, charges or fees imposed by the Government.
SECTION 15. Air Pollution Research and Development Program. – The Department, in coordination with the Department of Science and Technology (DOST), other agencies, the private sector, the academe, NGOs and POs, shall establish a National Research and Development Program for the prevention and control of air pollution. The Department shall give special emphasis to research on and the development of improved methods having industry-wide application for the prevention and control of air pollution. Such a research and development program shall develop air quality guideline values and standards in addition to internationally-accepted standards. It shall also consider the socio-cultural, political and economic implications of air quality management and pollution control.
Article 2- Air Pollution Clearances And Permits For Stationary Sources[edit]
SECTION 16. Permits. – Consistent with the provisions of this Act, the Department shall have the authority to issue permits as it may determine necessary for the prevention and abatement of air pollution.
Said permits shall cover emission limitations for the regulated air pollutants to help attain and maintain the ambient air quality standards. These permits shall serve as management tools for the LGUs in the development of their action plan.
SECTION 17. Emission Qoutas. – The Department may allow each regional industrial center that is designated as special airshed to allocate emission quotas to pollution sources within its jurisdiction that qualify under an environmental impact assessment system programmatic compliance program pursuant to the implementing rules and regulations of Presidential Decree No. 1586.
SECTION 18. Financial Liability for Environmental Rehabilitation. – As part of the environmental management plan attached to the environmental compliance certificate pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 1586 and rules and regulations set therefor, the Department shall require program and project proponents to put up financial guarantee mechanisms to finance the needs for emergency response, clean-up or rehabilitation of areas that may be damaged during the program or project's actual implementation. Liability for damages shall continue even after the termination of a program or project, where such damages are clearly attributable to that program or project and for a definite period to be determined by the Department and incorporated into the environmental compliance certificate.
Financial liability instruments may be in the form of a trust fund, environmental insurance, surety bonds, letters of credit, as well as self-insurance. The choice of the guarantee instrument or combinations thereof shall depend, among others, on the assessment of the risks involved. Proponents required to put up guarantee instruments shall furnish the Department with evidence of availment of such instruments.
Article 3- Pollution From Stationary Sources[edit]
SECTION 19. Financial Liability for Environmental Rehabilitation. – The Department shall, within two (2) years from the effectivity of this Act, and every two (2) years thereafter, review, or as the need therefor arises, revise and publish emission standards, to further improve the emission standards for stationary sources of air pollution. Such emission standards shall be based on mass rate of emission for all stationary sources of air pollution based on internationally-accepted standards, but not be limited to, nor be less stringent than such standards and with the standards set forth in this section. The standards, whichever is applicable, shall be the limit on the acceptable level of pollutants emitted from a stationary source for the protection of the public's health and welfare.
With respect to any trade, industry, process and fuel-burning equipment or industrial plant emitting air pollutants, the concentration at the point of emission shall not exceed the following limits:
Pollutants
Standard Applicable to Source
Maximum Permissible Limits (mg/NCM)
Methods of Analysisa
1.
Antimony and its compounds
Any source
10 as Sb
AASb
2.
Arsenic and its compounds
Any source
10 as As
AASb
3.
Cadmium and its compound
Any source
10 as Cd
AASb
4.
Carbon Monoxide
Any industrial source
500 as CO
Orsat Analysis
5.
Copper and its compounds
Any industrial source
100 as Cu
AASb
6.
Hydrofluoric Acid and Fluoride compounds
Any source other than the manufacture of Aluminum from Alumina
50 as HF
Titration with Ammonium Thiocyanate
7.
Hydrogen Sulphide
i) Geothermal power plants
c,d
Cadmium Sulfide Method
ii) Geothermal exploration and well-testing
e
Cadmium Sulfide Method
iii) Any source otherthan (i) and (ii)
7 as H2S
Cadmium Sulfide Method
8.
Lead
Any trade, industry or process
10 as Pb
AASb
9.
Mercury
Any source
5 as elemental Hg
AASb/Cold-Vapor Technique or Hg Analyzer
10.
Nickel and its compounds, except Nickel
Any source
20 as Ni
AASb
11.
Carbonylf
12.
NOx
i) Manufacture of Nitric Acid
2,000 as acid and NOx and calculated as NO2
Phenol-disulfonicacid Method
ii) Fuel burning steam generators
Existing Source
1,500 as NO2
New Source
Coal-fired
Oil-fired
1,000 as NO2
500 as NO2
iii) Any source other than (i)and (ii)
Existing Source
New Source
1,000 as NO2
500 as NO2
13.
Phosphorus Pentoxideg
Any source
200 as P2O5
Spectrophotometry
14.
Zinc and its compounds
Any source
100 as Zn
AASb
a^ Other equivalent methods approved by the Department may be used.
b^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometry
c^ All new geothermal power plants starting construction by 01 January 1995 shall control H2S emissions to not more than 150 g/GMW-Hr.
d^ All existing geothermal power plants shall control H2S emissions to not more than 200g/GMW-Hr within 5 years from the date of effectivity of these revised regulations.
e^ Best practicable control technology for air emissions and liquid discharges. Compliance
with air and water quality standards is required.
f^ Emission limit of Nickel Carbonyl shall not exceed 0.5 mg/NCM.
g^ Provisional Guideline
Provided, That the maximum limits in mg/NCM particulates in said sources shall be:
1.
Fuel Burning Equipment
a) Urban or Industrial Area
150 mg/NCM
b) Other Area
200 mg/NCM
2.
Cement Plants (Kilns, etc.)
150 mg/NCM
3.
Smelting Furnaces
150 mg/NCM
4.
Other Stationary Sourcesa
200 mg/NCM
a^ Other Stationary Sources means a trade, process, industrial plant, or fuel burning equipment other than thermal power plants, industrial boilers, cement plants, incinerators and smelting furnaces
Provided, further, That the maximum limits for sulfur oxides in said sources shall be:
(1)
Existing Sources
(i) Manufacture of Sulfuric Acid and Sulf(on)ation Process
2.0 gm/NCM as SO3
(ii) Fuel Burning Equipment
1.5 gm/NCM as SO2
(iii) Other Stationary Sourcesa
1.0 gm/NCM as SO3
(2)
New Sources
(i) Manufacture of Sulfuric Acid and Sulf(on)ation Process
1.5 gm/NCM as SO3
(ii) Fuel Burning Equipment
0.7 gm/NCM as SO2
(iii) Other Stationary Sourcesa
0.2 gm/NCM as SO3
a^ Other Stationary Sources refer to existing and new stationary sources other than those caused by the manufacture of sulfuric acid and sulfonation process, fuel burning equipment and incineration.
For stationary sources of pollution not specifically included in the immediately preceding paragraph, the following emission standards shall not be exceeded in the exhaust gas:
I. Daily And Half Hourly Average Values
Daily Average Values
Half Hourly Average Values
Total dust
10 mg/m3
30 mg/m3
Gaseous and vaporous organic substances, expressed as total organic carbon
10 mg/m3
20 mg/m3
Hydrogen chloride (HCl)
10 mg/m3
60 mg/m3
Hydrogen fluoride (HF)
1 mg/m3
4 mg/m3
Sulphur dioxide (SO2)
50 mg/m3
200 mg/m3
Nitrogen monoxide (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2), expressed as nitrogen  dioxide for incineration plants with a capacity exceeding 3 tonnes per hour
200 mg/m3
400 mg/m3
Nitrogen monoxide (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2), expressed as nitrogen  dioxide for incineration plants with a capacity 3 tonnes per hour or less
300 mg/m3
Ammonia
10 mg/m3
20 mg/m3
II. All Average Values over the Sample Period of a Minimum of 4 and Maximum of 8 Hours
Cadmium and its compounds, expressed as cadmium (Cd)
Total 0.05 mg/m3
Thallium and its compounds, expressed as thallium (Tl)
Mercury and its compounds, expressed as mercury (Hg)
0.05 mg/m3
Antimony and its compounds, expressed as antimony (Sb)
Total 0.05 mg/m3
Arsenic and its compounds, expressed as arsenic (As)
Lead and its compounds, expressed as lead (Pb)
Chromium and its compounds, expressed as chromium (Cr)
Cobalt and its compounds, expressed as cobalt (Co)
Copper and its compounds, expressed as copper (Cu)
Manganese and its compounds, expressed as manganese(Mn)
Nickel and its compounds, expressed as nickel (Ni)
Vanadium and its compounds, expressed as vanadium (V)
Tin and its compounds, expressed as tin (Sn)
These average values cover also gaseous and the vapor forms of the relevant heavy metal emissions as well as their compounds: Provided, That the emission of dioxins and furans into the air shall be reduced by the most progressive techniques: Provided, further, That all average values of dioxin and furans measured over the sample period of a minimum of 6 hours and a maximum of 8 hours must not exceed the limit value of 0.1 nanogram/m3.
Pursuant to Section 8 of this Act, the Department shall prepare a detailed action plan setting the emission standards or standards of performance for any stationary source, the procedure for testing emissions for each type of pollutant, and the procedure for enforcement of said standards.
Existing industries, which are proven to exceed emission rates established by the Department, in consultation with stakeholders, after a thorough, credible and transparent measurement process shall be allowed a grace period of eighteen (18) months for the establishment of an environmental management system and the installation of an appropriate air pollution control device: Provided, That an extension of not more than twelve (12) months may be allowed by the Department on meritorious grounds.
SECTION 20. Ban on Incineration. - Incineration, hereby defined as the burning of municipal, bio-medical and hazardous wastes, which process emits poisonous and toxic fumes, is hereby prohibited: Provided, however, That the prohibition shall not apply to traditional small-scale method of community/neighborhood sanitation "siga", traditional, agricultural, cultural, health, and food preparation and crematoria: Provided, further, That existing incinerators dealing with bio-medical wastes shall be phased out within three (3) years after the effectivity of this Act: Provided, finally, That in the interim, such units shall be limited to the burning of pathological and infectious wastes, and subject to close monitoring by the Department.
Local government units are hereby mandated to promote, encourage and implement in their respective jurisdiction a comprehensive ecological waste management that includes waste segregation, recycling and composting.
With due concern on the effects of climate change, the Department shall promote the use of state-of-the-art, environmentally-sound and safe non-burn technologies for the handling, treatment, thermal destruction, utilization, and disposal of sorted, unrecycled, uncomposted municipal, bio-medical and hazardous wastes.
Article 4 -Pollution From Motor Vehicles[edit]
SECTION 21. Pollution from Motor Vehicles. - a) The DOTC shall implement the emission standards for motor vehicles set pursuant to and as provided in this Act. To further improve the emission standards, the Department shall review, revise and publish the standards every two (2) years, or as the need arises. It shall consider the maximum limits for all major pollutants to ensure substantial improvement in air quality for the health, safety and welfare of the general public.
The following emission standards for type approval of motor vehicles shall be effective by the year 2003:
a) For light duty vehicles, the exhaust emission limits for gaseous pollutants shall be:
Emission Limits for Light Duty Vehicles Type Approval
(Directive 91/441/EEC)
CO
HC + NOx
PMa
(g/km)
(g/km)
(g/km)
2.72
0.97
0.14
a^ for compression-ignition engines only
b) For light commercial vehicles, the exhaust emission limit of gaseous
pollutants as a function of the given reference mass shall be:
Emission Limits for Light Commercial Vehicles Type Approval
(Directive 93/59/EEC)
Reference Weight (RW)
CO
HC + NOx
PMa
kg
(g/km)
(g/km)
(g/km)
Category 1
1250 < RW
2.72
0.97
0.14
Category 2
1250 < RW <1700
5.17
1.4
0.19
Category 3
RW > 1700
6.9
1.7
0.25
a^ for compression-ignition engines only
c) For heavy duty vehicles, the exhaust emission limits of gaseous pollutants shall be:
Emission Limits for Heavy Duty Vehicles Type Approval
(Directive 93/59/EEC)
CO
HC
NOx
PM
(g/kWh)
(g/kWh)
(g/kWh)
(g/kWh)
4.5
1.1
8.0
0.36a
a^ In the case of engines of 85kW or less, the limit value for particular emissions is increased by multiplying the quoted limit by a coefficient of 1.7
Fuel evaporative emission for spark-ignition engines shall not exceed 2.0 grams hydrocarbons per test. Likewise, it shall not allow any emission of gases from crankcase ventilation system into the atmosphere.
b) The Department, in collaboration with the DOTC, DTI and LGUs, shall develop an action plan for the control and management of air pollution from motor vehicles consistent with the Integrated Air Quality Framework. The DOTC shall enforce compliance with the emission standards for motor vehicles set by the Department. The DOTC may deputize other law enforcement agencies and LGUs for this purpose. To this end, the DOTC shall have the power to:
(1) Inspect and monitor the emissions of motor vehicles;
(2) Prohibit or enjoin the use of motor vehicles or a class of motor vehicles in any area or street at specified times; and
(3) Authorize private emission testing centers duly accredited by the DTI.
c) The DOTC, together with the DTI and the Department, shall establish the procedures for the inspection of motor vehicles and the testing of their emissions for the purpose of determining the concentration and/or rate of emission of pollutants discharged by said sources.
d) In order to ensure the substantial reduction of emissions from motor vehicles, the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), together with the DOTC and the Department, shall formulate and implement national motor vehicle inspection and maintenance program that will promote efficient and safe operation of all motor vehicles. In this regard, the DTI shall develop and implement standards and procedures for the certification of training institutions, instructors and facilities and the licensing of qualified private service centers and their technicians as prerequisite for performing the testing, servicing, repair and the required adjustment to the vehicle emission system. The DTI shall likewise prescribe regulations requiring the disclosure of odometer readings and the use of tamperresistant odometers for all motor vehicles including tamper-resistant fuel management systems for the effective implementation of the inspection and maintenance program.
SECTION 22. Regulation of All Motor Vehicles and Engines. - Any imported new or locally-assembled new motor vehicle shall not be registered unless it complies with the emission standards set pursuant to this Act, as evidenced by a Certificate of Conformity (COC) issued by the Department.
Any imported new motor vehicle engine shall not be introduced into commerce, sold or used unless it complies with emission standards set pursuant to this Act.
Any imported used motor vehicle or rebuilt motor vehicle using new or used engines, major parts or components shall not be registered unless it complies with the emission standards set pursuant to this Act.
In case of non-compliance, the importer or consignee may be allowed to modify or rebuild the vehicle or engine so that it will be in compliance with applicable emission standards.
No motor vehicle registration (MVR) shall be issued unless such motor vehicle passes the emission testing requirement promulgated in accordance with this Act. Such testing shall be conducted by the DOTC or its authorized inspection centers within sixty (60) days prior to date of registration.
The DTI shall promulgate the necessary regulations prescribing the useful life of vehicles and engines including devices in order to ensure that such vehicles will conform to the emissions which they were certified to meet. These regulations shall include provisions for ensuring the durability of emission devices.
SECTION 23. Second-Hand Motor Vehicle Engines. - Any imported secondhand motor vehicle engine shall not be introduced into commerce, sold or used unless it complies with emission standards set pursuant to this Act.
Article 5 -Pollution From Other Sources[edit]
SECTION 24. Pollution from Smoking. - Smoking inside a public building or an enclosed public place including public vehicles and other means of transport or in any enclosed area outside of one's private residence, private place of work or any duly designated smoking area is hereby prohibited under this Act. This provision shall be implemented by the LGUs.
SECTION 25. Pollution from Other Mobile Sources. - The Department, in coordination with appropriate agencies, shall formulate and establish the necessary standards for all mobile sources other than those referred to in Section 21 of this Act. The imposition of the appropriate fines and penalties from these sources for any violation of emission standards shall be under the jurisdiction of the DOTC.
Chapter 3 -Fuels, Additives, Substances And Pollutants[edit]
Article 1 -Fuels, Additives And Substances[edit]
SECTION 26. Fuels and Additives. - Pursuant to the Air Quality Framework to be established under Section 7 of this Act, this Department of Energy (DOE), co-chaired by the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), in consultation with the Bureau of Product Standards (BPS) of the DTI, the DOST, the representatives of the fuel and automotive industries, academe and the consumers shall set specifications for all types of fuel and fuel-related products, to improve fuel composition for increased efficiency and reduced emissions: Provided, however, That the specifications for all types of fuel and fuelrelated products set-forth pursuant to this section shall be adopted by the BPS as Philippine National Standards (PNS).
The DOE, shall also specify the allowable content of additives in all types of fuels and fuel-related products. Such standards shall be based primarily on threshold levels of health and research studies. On the basis of such specifications, the DOE shall likewise limit the content or begin the phase-out of additives in all types of fuels and fuel-related products as it may deem necessary. Other agencies involved in the performance of this function shall be required to coordinate with the DOE and transfer all documents and information necessary for the implementation of this provision.
Consistent with the provisions of the preceding paragraphs under this section, it is declared that:
a) not later than eighteen (18) months after the effectivity of this Act, no person shall manufacture, import, sell, supply, offer for sale, dispense, transport or introduce into commerce unleaded premium gasoline fuel which has an antiknock index (AKI) of not less than 87.5 and Reid vapor pressure of not more than 9 psi. Within six (6) months after the effectivity of this Act, unleaded gasoline fuel shall contain aromatics not to exceed forty-five percent (45%) by volume and benzene not to exceed four percent (4%) by volume: Provided, That by year 2003, unleaded gasoline fuel should contain aromatics not to exceed thirty-five percent (35%) by volume and benzene not to exceed two percent (2%) by volume;
b) not later than eighteen (18) months after the effectivity of this Act, no person shall manufacture, import, sell, supply, offer for sale, dispense, transport or introduce into commerce automotive diesel fuel which contains a concentration of sulfur in excess of 0.20% by weight with a cetane number or index of not less than forty-eight (48): Provided, That by year 2004, content of said sulfur shall be 0.05% by weight, and
c) not later than eighteen (18) months after the effectivity of this Act, no person shall manufacture, import, sell, supply, offer for sale, dispense, transport or introduce into commerce industrial diesel fuel which contains a concentration of sulfur in excess of 0.30% (by weight).
Every two (2) years thereafter or as the need arises, the specifications of unleaded gasoline and of automotive and industrial diesel fuels shall be reviewed and revised for further improvement in formulation and in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
The fuels characterized above shall be commercially available. Likewise, the same shall be the reference fuels for emission and testing procedures to be established in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Any proposed additive shall not in any way increase emissions of any of the regulated gases which shall include, but not limited to carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, and oxides of nitrogen and particulate matter, in order to be approved and certified by the Department.
SECTION 27. Regulation of Fuels and Fuel Additives. - - The DOE, in coordination with the Department and the BPS, shall regulate the use of any fuel or fuel additive. No manufacturer, processor or trader of any fuel or additive may import, sell, offer for sale, or introduce into commerce such fuel or additive unless the same has been registered with the DOE. Prior to registration, the manufacturer, processor or trader shall provide the DOE with the following relevant information:
a) Product identity and composition to determine the potential health effects of such fuels and additives;
b) Description of the analytical technique that can be used to detect and measure the additive in any fuel;
c) Recommended range of concentration; and
d) Purpose in the use of the fuel and additive.
SECTION 28. Misfuelling. - In order to prevent the disabling of any emission control device by lead contamination, no person shall introduce or cause or allow the introduction of leaded gasoline into any motor vehicle equipped with a gasoline tank filler inlet and labeled "unleaded gasoline only". This prohibition shall also apply to any person who knows or should know that such vehicle is designed solely for the use of unleaded gasoline.
SECTION 29. Prohibition on Manufacture, Import and Sale of Leaded Gasoline and of Engines and/or Components Requiring Leaded Gasoline. - Effective not later than eighteen (18) months after the enactment of this Act, no person shall manufacture, import, sell, offer for sale, introduce into commerce, convey or otherwise dispose of, in any manner leaded gasoline and engines and components requiring the use of leaded gasoline.
For existing vehicles, the DTI shall formulate standards and procedures that will allow non-conforming engines to comply with the use of unleaded fuel within five (5) years after the effectivity of this Act.
Article 2 -Other Pollutants[edit]
SECTION 30. Ozone-Depleting Substances. – Consistent with the terms and conditions of the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer and other international agreements and protocols to which the Philippine is a signatory, the Department shall phase out ozone-depleting substances.
Within sixty (60) days after the enactment of this Act, the Department shall publish a list of substances which are known to cause harmful effects on the stratospheric ozone layer.
SECTION 31. Greenhouse Gases. – The Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Service Administration (PAGASA) shall regularly monitor meteorological factors affecting environmental conditions including ozone depletion and greenhouse gases and coordinate with the Department in order to effectively guide air pollution monitoring and standard-setting activities.
The Department, together with concerned agencies and local government units, shall prepare and fully implement a national plan consistent with the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and other international agreements, conventions and protocols on the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in the country.
SECTION 32. Persistent Organic Pollutants. – The Department shall, within a period of two (2) years after the enactment of this Act, establish an inventory list of all sources of Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) in the country. The Department shall develop short-term and long-term national government programs on the reduction and elimination of POPs such as dioxins and furans. Such programs shall be formulated within a year after the establishment of the inventory list.
SECTION 33. Radioactive Emissions. – All projects which will involve the use of atomic and/or nuclear energy, and will entail release and emission of radioactive substances into the environment, incident to the establishment or possession of nuclear energy facilities and radioactive materials, handling, transport, production, storage, and use of radioactive materials, shall be regulated in the interest of public health and welfare by the Philippine Nuclear Research Institute (PNRI), in coordination with the Department and other appropriate government agencies.
Chapter 4 -Institutional Mechanism[edit]
SECTION 34. Lead Agency. – The Department, unless otherwise provided herein, shall be the primary government agency responsible for the implementation and enforcement of this Act. To be more effective in this regard, the Department's Environmental Management Bureau (EMB) shall be converted from a staff bureau to a line bureau for a period of no more than two (2) years, unless a separate, comprehensive environmental management agency is created.
SECTION 35. Linkage Mechanism. – The Department shall consult, participate, cooperate and enter into agreement with other government agencies, or with affected nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) or people's organizations (POs), or private enterprises in the furtherance of the objectives of this Act.
SECTION 36. Role of Local Government Units. – Local government units (LGUs) shall share the responsibility in the management and maintenance of air quality within their territorial jurisdiction. Consistent with Sections 7, 8 and 9 of this Act, LGUs shall implement air quality standards set by the Board in areas within their jurisdiction; Provided, however, That in case where the Board has not been duly constituted and has not promulgated its standards, the standards set forth in this Act shall apply.
The Department shall provide the LGUs with technical assistance, trainings and a continuing capability-building program to prepare them to undertake full administration of the air quality management and regulation within their territorial jurisdiction.
SECTION 37. Environment and Natural Resources Office. – There may be established an Environment and Natural Resources Office in every province, city, or municipality which shall be headed by the environment and natural resources officer and shall be appointed by the Chief Executive of every province, city or municipality in accordance with the provisions of Section 484 of Republic Act No. 7160. Its powers and duties, among others, are:
a) To prepare comprehensive air quality management programs, plans and strategies within the limits set forth in Republic Act No. 7160 and this Act which shall be implemented within its territorial jurisdiction upon the approval of the sanggunian;
b) To provide technical assistance and support to the governor or mayor, as the case may be, in carrying out measures to ensure the delivery of basic services and the provision of adequate facilities relative to air quality;
c) To take the lead in all efforts concerning air quality protection and rehabilitation;
d) To recommend to the Board air quality standards which shall not exceed the maximum permissible standards set by national laws;
e) To coordinate with other government agencies and non-governmental organizations in the implementation of measures to prevent and control air pollution; and
f) Exercise such other powers and perform such duties and functions as may be prescribed by law or ordinance; Provided, However, That in provinces/cities/municipalities where there are no environment and natural resources officers, the local executive concerned may designate any of his official and/or chief of office preferably the provincial, city or municipal agriculturist, or any of his employee; Provided, finally, That in case an employee is designated as such, he must have a sufficient experience in environmental and natural resources management, conservation and utilization.
SECTION 38. Record-keeping, Inspection, Monitoring and Entry by the Department. – The Department or its duly accredited entity shall, after proper consultation and notice, require any person who owns or operates any emission source or who is subject to any requirement of this Act to: (a) establish and maintain relevant records; (b) make relevant reports; (c) install, use and maintain monitoring equipment or methods; (d) sample emission, in accordance with the methods, locations, intervals, and manner prescribed by the Department; (e) keep records on control equipment parameters, production variables or other indirect data when direct monitoring of emissions is impractical; and (f) provide such other information as the Department may reasonably require. Pursuant to this Act, the Department, through its authorized representatives, shall have the right of: a) entry or access to any premises including documents and relevant materials as referred to in the herein preceding paragraphs; b) inspect any pollution or waste source, control device, monitoring equipment or method required; and c) test any emission.
Any record, report or information obtained under this section shall be made available to the public, except upon a satisfactory showing to the Department by the entity concerned that the record, report, or information, or parts thereof, if made public, would divulge secret methods or processes entitled to protection as intellectual property. Such record, report or information shall likewise be incorporated in the Department's industrial rating system.
SECTION 39. Public Education and Information Campaign. – A continuing air quality information and education campaign shall be promoted by the Department, the Department of Education, Culture and Sports (DECS), the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG), the Department of Agriculture (DA) and the Philippine Information Agency (PIA). Consistent with Section 7 of this Act, such campaign shall encourage the participation of other government agencies and the private sector including NGOs, POs, the academe, environmental groups and other private entities in a multi-sectoral information campaign.
Chapter 5 -Actions[edit]
SECTION 40. Administrative Action. – Without prejudice to the right of any affected person to file an administrative action, the Department shall, on its own instance or upon verified complaint by any person, institute administrative proceedings against any person who violates:
a) Standards or limitation provided under this Act; or
b) Any order, rule or regulation issued by the Department with respect to such standard or limitation.
SECTION 41. Citizen Suits. – For purposes of enforcing the provisions of this
Act or its implementing rules and regulations, any citizen may file an appropriate civil,
criminal or administrative action in the proper courts against:
a) Any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this Act or its implementing rules and regulations; or
b) The Department or other implementing agencies with respect to orders, rules and regulations issued inconsistent with this Act, and/or
c) Any public officer who willfully or grossly neglects the performance of an act specifically enjoined as a duty by this Act or its implementing rules and regulations; or abuses his authority in the performance of his duty; or, in any manner, improperly performs his duties under this Act or its implementing rules and regulations: Provided, however, That no suit can be filed until after thirty-day (30) notice has been given to the public officer and the alleged violator concerned and no appropriate action has been taken thereon.
The court shall exempt such action from the payment of filing fees, except fees for actions not capable of pecuniary estimations, and shall, likewise, upon prima facie showing of the non-enforcement or violation complained of, exempt the plaintiff from the filing of an injunction bond for the issuance of a preliminary injunction.
Within thirty (30) days, the court shall make a determination if the complaint herein is malicious and/or baseless and shall accordingly dismiss the action and award attorney's fees and damages.
SECTION 42. Independence of Action. – The filing of an administrative suit against such person/entity does not preclude the right of any other person to file any criminal or civil action. Such civil action shall proceed independently.
SECTION 43. Suits and Strategic Legal Actions Against Public Participation and the Enforcement of this Act. – Where a suit is brought against a person who filed an action as provided in Section 41 of this Act, or against any person, institution or government agency that implements this Act, it shall be the duty of the investigating prosecutor or the court, as the case may be, to immediately make a determination not exceeding thirty (30) days whether said legal action has been filed to harass, vex, exert undue pressure or stifle such legal recourses of the person complaining of or enforcing the provisions of this Act. Upon determination thereof, evidence warranting the same, the court shall dismiss the case and award attorney's fees and double damages.
This provision shall also apply and benefit public officers who are sued for acts committed in their official capacity, there being no grave abuse of authority, and done in the course of enforcing this Act.
SECTION 44. Lien Upon Personal and Immovable Properties of Violators. – Fines and penalties imposed pursuant to this Act shall be liens upon personal and immovable properties of the violator. Such lien shall, in case of insolvency of the respondent violator, enjoy preference subsequent to laborer's wages under Articles 2241 and 2242 of Republic Act No. 386, otherwise known as the New Civil Code of the Philippines.
Chapter 6 -Fines And Penalties[edit]
SECTION 45. Violation of Standards for Stationary Sources. – For actual exceedance of any pollution or air quality standards under this Act or its rules and regulations, the Department, through the Pollution Adjudication Board (PAB), shall impose a fine of not more than One hundred thousand pesos (Php100,000.00) for every day of violation against the owner or operator of a stationary source until such time that the standards have been complied with.
For purposes of the application of the fines, the PAB shall prepare a fine rating system to adjust the maximum fine based on the violator's ability to pay, degree of willfulness, degree of negligence, history of noncompliance and degree of recalcitrance: Provided, That in case of negligence, the first time offender's ability to pay may likewise be considered by the Pollution Adjudication Board: Provided, further, That in the absence of any extenuating or aggravating circumstances, the amount of fine for negligence shall be equivalent to one-half of the fine for willful violation. The fines herein prescribed shall be increased by at least ten percent (10%) every three (3) years to compensate for inflation and to maintain the deterrent function of such fines.
In addition to the fines, the PAB shall order the closure, suspension of development, construction, or operations of the stationary sources until such time that proper environmental safeguards are put in place: Provided, That an establishment found liable for a third offense shall suffer permanent closure immediately. This paragraph shall be without prejudice to the immediate issuance of an ex parte order for such closure, suspension of development or construction, or cessation of operations during the pendency of the case upon prima facie evidence that there is imminent threat to life, public health, safety or general welfare, or to plant or animal life, or whenever there is an exceedance of the emission standards set by the Department and/or the Board and/or the appropriate LGU.
SECTION 46. Violation of Standards for Motor Vehicles. – No motor vehicle shall be registered with the DOTC unless it meets the emission standards set by the Department as provided in Section 21 hereof.
Any vehicle suspected of violation of emission standards through visual signs, such as, but not limited to smoke-belching, shall be subjected to an emission test by a duly authorized testing center for this purpose, the DOTC or its authorized testing center shall establish a roadside inspection system. Should it be shown that there was no violation of emission standards, the vehicle shall be immediately released. Otherwise, a testing result indicating an exceedance of the emission standards would warrant the continuing custody of the impounded vehicle unless the appropriate penalties are fully paid, and the license plate is surrendered to the DOTC pending the fulfillment of the undertaking by the owner/operator of the motor vehicle to make the necessary repairs so as to comply with the standards. A pass shall herein be issued by the DOTC to authorize the use of the motor vehicle within a specified period that shall not exceed seven (7) days for the sole purpose of making the necessary repairs on the said vehicle. The owner/operator of the vehicle shall be required to correct its defects and show proof of compliance to the appropriate pollution control office before the vehicle can be allowed to be driven on any public or subdivision roads.
In addition, the driver and operator of the apprehended vehicle shall undergo a seminar on pollution control and management conducted by the DOTC and shall also suffer the following penalties:
a) First offense - a fine not to exceed Two thousand pesos (Php2,000.00);
b) Second offense - a fine not less than Two thousand pesos (Php2,000.0) and not to exceed Four thousand pesos (Php4,000.00); and
c) Third offense - one (1) year suspension of the Motor Vehicle Registration (MVR) and a fine of not less than Four thousand pesos (Php4,000.00) and not more than Six thousand pesos (Php6,000.00).
Any violation of the provisions of Section 21 paragraph (d) with regard to national inspection and maintenance program, including technicians and facility compliance shall be penalized with a fine of not less than Thirty thousand pesos (Php30,000.00) or cancellation of license of both the technician and the center, or both, as determined by the DTI.
All law enforcement officials and deputized agents accredited to conduct vehicle emissions testing and apprehensions shall undergo a mandatory training on emission standards and regulations. For this purpose, the Department, together with the DOTC, DTI, DOST, Philippine National Police (PNP) and other concerned agencies and private entities shall design a training program.
SECTION 47. Fines and Penalties for Violations of Other Provisions in the Act. – For violations of all other provisions provided in this Act and of the rules and regulations thereof, a fine of not less than Ten thousand pesos (Php10,000.00) but not more than One hundred thousand pesos (Php100,000.00) or six (6) months to six (6) years imprisonment or both shall be imposed. If the offender is a juridical person, the president, manager, directors, trustees, the pollution control officer or the officials directly in charge of the operations shall suffer the penalty herein provided.
SECTION 48. Gross Violations. – In case of gross violation of this Act or its implementing rules and regulations, the PAB shall recommend to the proper government agencies to file the appropriate criminal charges against the violators. The PAB shall assist the public prosecutor in the litigation of the case. Gross violation shall mean (a) three (3) or more specific offenses within a period of (1) year, (b) three (3) or more specific offenses within three (3) consecutive years; (c) blatant disregard of the orders of the PAB, such as but not limited to the breaking of seal, padlocks and other similar devices, or operating despite the existence of an order for closure, discontinuance or cessation of operation; and (d) irreparable or grave damage to the environment as a consequence of any violation or omission of the provisions of this Act.
Offenders shall be punished with imprisonment of not less than six (6) years but not more than ten (10) years at the discretion of the court. If the offender is a juridical person, the president, manager, directors, trustees, the pollution control officer or the officials directly in charge of the operations shall suffer the penalty herein provided.
Chapter 7 -Final Provisions[edit]
SECTION 49. Potential Loss or Shifts of Employment. – The Secretary of Labor is hereby authorized to establish a compensation, retraining and relocation program to assist workers laid off due to a company's compliance with the provisions of this Act.
SECTION 50. Appropriations. – An amount of Seven hundred fifty million pesos (Php750,000,000.00) shall be appropriated for the initial implementation of this Act, of which, the amount of Three hundred million pesos (Php300,000,000.00) shall be appropriated to the Department; Two hundred million pesos (Php200,000,000.00) to the DTI; One hundred fifty million pesos (Php150,000,000.00) to the DOTC; and, One hundred million pesos (Php100,000,000.00) to the DOE.
Thereafter, the amount necessary to effectively carry out the provisions of this Act shall be included in the General Appropriations Act.
SECTION 51. Implementing Rules and Regulations. – The Department in coordination with the Committees on Environment and Ecology of the Senate and House of Representatives, respectively and other concerned agencies, shall promulgate the implementing rules and regulations for this Act, within one (1) year after the enactment of this Act. Provided, That rules and regulations issued by other government agencies and instrumentalities for the prevention and/or abatement of pollution not inconsistent with this Act shall supplement the rules and regulations issued by the Department, pursuant to the provisions of this Act.
The draft of the implementing rules and regulations shall be published and be the subject of public consultations with affected sectors.
There shall be a mandatory review of the implementing rules and regulations and standards set pursuant to the provisions of this Act.
SECTION 52. Report to Congress. – The Department shall report to Congress, not later than March 30 of every year following the approval of this Act, the progress of the pollution control efforts and make the necessary recommendations in areas where there is need for legislative action.
SECTION 53. Joint Congressional Oversight Committee. – There is hereby created a joint congressional oversight committee to monitor the implementation of this Act. The committee shall be composed of five (5) senators and five (5) representatives to be appointed by the Senate President and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, respectively. The oversight committee shall be co-chaired by a senator and a representative designated by the Senate President and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, respectively.
The mandate given to the joint congressional oversight committee under this Act shall be without prejudice to the performance of the duties and functions by the respective existing oversight committees of the Senate and the House of Representatives.
SECTION 54. Separability of Provisions. – If any provision of this Act or the application of such provision to any person or circumstances is declared unconstitutional, the remainder of the Act or the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected by such declaration.
SECTION 55. Repealing Clause. – Presidential Decree No. 1181 is hereby repealed Presidential Decree Nos. 1152, 1586, Presidential Decree No. 984 are partly modified. All other laws, orders, issuance, rules and regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
SECTION 56. Effectivity. – This Act shall take effect fifteen (15) days from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette or in at least two (2) newspapers of general circulation.
Approved,
MANUEL B. VILLAR, JR.
Speaker of the House of Representatives
MARCELO B. FERNAN
President of the Senate
This Act which is a consolidation of Senate Bill No. 1255 and House Bill No. 6216 was finally passed  by the Senate and the House of Representatives on May 13, 1999 and May 10, 1999, respectively.
ROBERTO P. NAZARENO
Secretary General House of Representatives
HEZEL P. GACUTAN
Senate Secretary
Approved: : 23 June 1999
JOSEPH EJERCITO ESTRADA
President of the Philippines
This work is in the public domain because it is a work of the Philippine government (see Republic Act No. 8293 Sec. 176).
All official Philippine texts of a legislative, administrative, or judicial nature, or any official translation thereof, are ineligible for copyright.
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1354
Cached time: 20221017160146
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.175 seconds
Real time usage: 0.222 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1349/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 16826/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4384/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 214/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.070/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 2368557/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 2/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  147.482      1 -total
 76.07%  112.185      1 Template:Header
 10.12%   14.928      1 Template:Header/main_block
  7.79%   11.496      1 Template:PD-PhilGovDoc
  6.65%    9.804      1 Template:License
  4.11%    6.067      1 Template:Rule
  3.68%    5.425      1 Template:TOC_hidden
  2.85%    4.197      1 Template:License_scope
  2.15%    3.175      1 Template:License_grammar
  2.11%    3.116     30 Template:Note
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:1547493-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017160145 and revision id 11561791.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Republic_Act_No._8749&oldid=11561791"
Categories: 1998 worksLaw of the PhilippinesPD-PhilGovDocHidden categories: Works using categories parameterPages with override author
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 4 August 2021, at 04:59.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy (1729) - Wikisource, the free online library
The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy (1729) - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy (1729)
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
This work is incomplete. If you'd like to help expand it, see the help pages and the style guide, or leave a comment on the talk page.
For other English-language translations of this work, see    The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy.
The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy (1729) by Isaac Newton, translated by Andrew Motte
An English translation by Andrew Motte, based on the 1726 3rd edition of Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica.
Volume 1: Scan index
Volume 2: Scan index
589595The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy (1729)Andrew MotteIsaac Newton
 Title page
Contents
Front Matter
page
Title Page
i
Dedication
iii
The Author's Preface
vii
The Preface of Mr Roger Cotes
xiv
Definitions
1
Scholium
9
Axioms, or Laws of Motion
19
Book 1: The Motion of Bodies
Section I
41
Section II
57
Section III
79
Section IV
94
Section V
104
Section VI
143
Section VII
154
Section VIII
168
Section IX
177
Section X
196
Section XI
218
Section XII
263
Section XIII
292
Section XIV
311
Book 2: The Motion of Bodies (in resisting mediums)
Section I
1
Section II
12
Section III
45
Section IV
55
Section V
64
Section VI
80
Section VII
111
Section VIII
163
Section IX
184
Book 3: Of the System of the World
Rules of Reasoning in Philosophy
202
Phænomena, or Appearances
206
Propositions I-IX (Force of gravity)
213
Propositions X-XXIV (Motions of the sea)
230
Propositions XXV-XXXIII (Motions of the moon)
262
Propositions XXXVI-XXXVIII (Forces to move the sea)
305
Lemmas I-III, Proposition XXXIX (Precession of equinoxes)
315
Lemmas IV-XI, Propositions XL-XLII (Comets)
323
General Scholium
387
Index
XX
Appendix
i
The Laws of the Moon's Motion according to Gravity (John Machin)
(1)
Errata
XX
Contents
1 Book 1
2 Book 2
3 Book 3
4 References (not part of original work)
Book 1[edit]
THE MOTION OF BODIES
Of the method of first and last ratios of quantities, by the help whereof we demonstrate the propositions that follow [1]
Of the invention of centripetal forces [2]
Of the motion of bodies in eccentric Conic sections [3]
Of the finding of elliptic, parabolic, and hyperbolic orbits, from the focus given [4]
How the orbits are to be found when neither focus is given [5]
How the motions are to be found in given orbits [6]
Concerning the rectilinear ascent and descent of bodies [7]
Of the invention of orbits wherein bodies will revolve, being acted upon by any sort of centripetal force [8]
Of the motion of bodies in movable orbits; and of the motion of the apsides [9]
Of the motion of bodies in given superficies; and of the reciprocal motion of funependulous bodies [10]
Of the motions of bodies tending to each other with centripetal forces [11]
Of the attractive forces of sphaerical bodies [12]
Of the attractive forces of bodies which are not of a sphaerical figure [13]
Of the motion of very small bodies when agitated by centripetal forces tending to the several parts of any very great body [14]
Book 2[edit]
THE MOTION OF BODIES (In resisting mediums)
Of the Motion of Bodies that are resisted in the ratio of the Velocity [15]
Of the Motion of Bodies that are resisted in the duplicate ratio of their Velocities [16]
Of the Motions of Bodies which are resisted partly in the ratio of the Velocities, and partly in the duplicate of the same ratio [17]
Of the circular motion of bodies in resisting mediums [18]
Of the density and compression of fluids; and of Hydrostatics [19]
Of the motion and resistance of funependulous bodies [20]
Of the motion of fluids and the resistance made to projected bodies [21]
Of motion propagated thro' fluids [22]
Of the circular motion of fluids [23]
Book 3[edit]
OF THE SYSTEM OF THE WORLD
Preface to Book 3 [24]
Rules of Reasoning in Philosophy [25]
The Phaenomena or Appearances [26]
Propositions [27]
Motion of the satellites of Jupiter [28]
Propositions 2: the primary Planets, and 3: the Moon [29]
Proposition 6: Gravitation towards every Planet [30]
Proposition 7: Gravity tending to all Bodies [31]
Proposition 10: Longevity of planetary motions [32]
Proposition 11: Common centre of gravity of the Earth, the Sun and all the Planets [33]
Proposition 13: the Planets move in Ellipses [34]
Proposition 17: the diurnal motions of the Planets are uniform [35]
Proposition 18: (oblateness of the Planets & the Earth) [36]
Proposition 21: the equinoctial points go backwards [37]
Proposition 22: all the motions of the Moon ... follow from the principles ... laid down [38]
Proposition 24: the flux and reflux of the Sea, arise from the actions of the Sun and Moon [39]
Propositions 25-35: (disturbances of the motions of the Moon) [40]
Proposition 36-37: (forces of Sun & Moon to move the Sea) [41]
Proposition 38: Figure of the Moon's Body [42]
Proposition 39: precession of the equinoxes [43]
(Theory of the comets) [44]
General Scholium[1] [45]
References (not part of original work)[edit]
↑ Ducheyne, Steffen. "The General Scholium: Some notes on Newton’s published and unpublished endeavours, Lias: Sources and Documents Relating to the Early Modern History of Ideas, vol. 33, n° 2, pp. 223-274.". Retrieved 2008-11-19. 
  This work is a translation and has a separate copyright status to the applicable copyright protections of the original content.
Original:
This work was published before January 1, 1927, and is in the public domain worldwide because the author died at least 100 years ago.
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
Translation:
This work was published before January 1, 1927, and is in the public domain worldwide because the author died at least 100 years ago.
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1355
Cached time: 20221017003443
Cache expiry: 86400
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐page‐id, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.249 seconds
Real time usage: 0.320 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1483/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 26752/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10022/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 2956/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.137/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4333630/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  265.705      1 -total
 35.03%   93.073     44 Template:Ts
 28.97%   76.967      1 Template:Incomplete
 22.81%   60.600      1 Template:Ambox
 10.77%   28.629      1 Template:Header
  9.35%   24.850      1 Template:Cite_web
  7.72%   20.520      1 Template:Translation_licence
  5.29%   14.065      1 Template:Category_handler
  4.74%   12.600      1 Template:License_container_begin
  4.25%   11.294      1 Template:Collapsible_box
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:589595-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017003442 and revision id 11387660.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=The_Mathematical_Principles_of_Natural_Philosophy_(1729)&oldid=11387660"
Categories: Incomplete texts without a sourcePD-old
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this page
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
DeutschFrançaisLatina
Add links
 This page was last edited on 13 June 2021, at 08:57.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
"Go tell it" — What a Message — - Wikisource, the free online library
"Go tell it" — What a Message — - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
"Go tell it" — What a Message —
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
←Bliss is the plaything of the child — (1553)
"Go tell it" — What a Message — by Emily Dickinson1554(1555) I groped for him before I knew→
sister projects: Wikidata item.
14154"Go tell it" — What a Message — — 1554Emily Dickinson
"Go tell it" — What a Message —
To whom — is specified —
Not murmur — not endearment —
But simply — we — obeyed —
Obeyed — a Lure — a Longing?
Oh Nature — none of this —
To Law — said sweet Thermopylae
I give my dying Kiss —
This work was published before January 1, 1927, and is in the public domain worldwide because the author died at least 100 years ago.
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
Poetry by Emily Dickinson (edit list):
By letter of the alphabet:
A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W, Y.
By number
1-99, 100-199, 200-299, 300-399, 400-499, 500-599, 600-699, 700-799, 800-899, 900-999, 1000-1099, 1100-1199, 1200-1299, 1300-1399, 1400-1499, 1500-1599, 1600-1699, 1700-1775.
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1399
Cached time: 20221017211909
Cache expiry: 86400
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.052 seconds
Real time usage: 0.077 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 273/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 14209/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2382/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 7/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 504/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.020/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1460033/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%   57.871      1 -total
 89.66%   51.886      1 Template:EDheader
 83.88%   48.540      1 Template:Header
  9.34%    5.405      1 Template:Header/main_block
  6.17%    3.569      1 Template:PD-old
  3.86%    2.235      1 Template:License
  3.04%    1.758      1 Template:Emily_Dickinson_Index
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:14154-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211909 and revision id 4327423.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=%22Go_tell_it%22_—_What_a_Message_—&oldid=4327423"
Categories: PD-oldWar in poetryGreco-Persian Wars
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 1 March 2013, at 00:09.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Maury, Reverend James vs Henry, Patrick -- "The Parson's Opinion Of The Parson's Cause" - Wikisource, the free online library
Maury, Reverend James vs Henry, Patrick -- "The Parson's Opinion Of The Parson's Cause" - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Maury, Reverend James vs Henry, Patrick -- "The Parson's Opinion Of The Parson's Cause"
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
The Parson's Opinion of "The Parson's Cause"  (1763)  by James Maurysister projects: Wikipedia article, Wikidata item.
The Parsons’ Cause came home to Hanover County, Virginia, when the Reverend James Maury brought suit against the vestry for his back pay, and won. At that point the novice attorney Patrick Henry was asked to argue the vestry’s side when the jury convened to determine how much Rev. Maury should be paid. The presiding judge was Col. John Henry, Partick Henry's father. In a fervent oration Henry criticized the established clergy, and challenged British authority, wherein Patrick Henry committed Treason in his moments of dramatic oratory. Patrick Henry persuaded the jurors that Maury was opposed at the beginning to grant token damages of only one penny for clergy. Henry’s victory in the Parsons Cause enhanced his legal practice and launched a political career. He was fortunate all clergy members did not gather together and petition the king including charges of Henry's words of treason such as calling the king a "tyrant." Transcription & research by William Maury Morris II of Virginia.
556268The Parson's Opinion of "The Parson's Cause"1763James Maury
THE PARSON’S OPINION OF  “ THE PARSON’S CAUSE ”
BY REVEREND JAMES MAURY
(1763)
This celebrated case illustrates the relation of church and state in the colonies, and is also the beginning of the public career of Patrick Henry. The Reverend James Maury was an estimable minister of Huguenot ancestry.-- Bibliography: Winsor, Narrative and Critical History, VI, 24; Maury, Memoirs of a Huguenot Family; Channing and Hart, Guide, § 134.
December 12th, 1763.
To the Reverend John Camm.
DEAR SIR: — Now that I am somewhat more at leisure, than when I wrote to you by Major Winston, from Hanover County, Virginia, some few days ago, I have sat down to give you the best account I can of the most material passages in the trial of my cause against the Collectors in that Court, both to satisfy your own curiosity, and to enable the lawyer, by whom it is to be managed in the General Court, to form some judgment of its merits. I believe, sir, you were advised from Nov’r Court, that the Bench had adjudged the Two-Penny Act to be no law; and that, at the next, a jury, on a writ of inquiry, were to examine whether the Plaintiff had sustained any damages, and what. Accordingly, at December Court, a select jury was ordered to be summoned; but, how far they who gave the order, wished or intended it to be regarded, you may judge from the sequel. The Sheriff went into a public room, full of gentlemen, and told his errand. One excused himself (Peter Robinson of King William County) as having already given his opinion in a similar case. On this, as a person then present told me, he immediately left the room, without summoning any one person there. He afterwards met another gentleman (Richard Sq. Taylor) on the green, and, on his saying he was not fit to serve, being a churchwarden, he took upon himself to excuse him, too, and, as far as I can learn, made no further attempts to summon gentlemen. 
These, you’ll say, were but feeble endeavors to comply with the directions of the Court in that particular. Hence, he went among the vulgar herd. After he had selected and set down upon his list about eight or ten of these, I met him with it in his hand, and on looking over it, observed to him that they were not such jurors as the Court had directed him to get, being people of whom I had never heard before, except one, whom, I told him, he knew to be a party in the cause, as one of the Collector’s Securities, and, therefore, not fit for a juror on that occasion. Yet this man’s name was not erased. He was even called in Court, and, had he not excused himself, would probably have been admitted. For, I cannot recollect, that the Court expressed either surprise or dislike that a more proper jury had not been summoned. Nay, though I objected against them, yet, as Patrick Henry (one of the Defendant’s lawyers) insisted they were honest men, and, therefore, unexceptionable, they were immediately called to the book and sworn. Three of them, as I was afterwards told, nay, some said four, were Dissenters of that denomination called New Lights, [1a], [1b], [1c],[1d], which the Sheriff, as they were all his acquaintance, must have known. Messrs. Gist and McDowall, the two most considerable purchasers in that county, were now called in to prove the price of tobacco, and sworn. The testimony of the former imported, that, during the months of May and June, 1759, tobacco had currently sold at 50s. per hundred, and that himself, at or about the latter end of the last of those months, had sold some hundreds of hhds. (hogsheds) at that price, and, amongst the rest, one hundred to be delivered in the month of August, which, however, were not delivered till September. That of the latter only proved, “That 50s. was the current price of tobacco that season.” This was the sum of the evidence for the Plaintiff.
Against him, was produced a receipt to the Collector, to the best of my remembrance in these words: “Received of Thomas Johnson, Jun’r, at this and some former payments, £. 144, current money, by James Maury.” After the lawyers on both sides had displayed the force and weight of the evidence, pro and con. to their Honors, the jurors, and one of those who appeared for the Defendants had observed to them that they must find (or if they must find, I am not sure which, but think the former) for the Plaintiff, but need not find more than one farthing; they went out, and, according to instruction (though whether according to evidence or not, I leave you to judge), in less than five minutes brought in a verdict for the Plaintiff, one penny damages. Mr. Lyons urged, as the verdict was contrary to evidence, the jury ought to be sent out again. But no notice was taken of it, and the verdict admitted without hesitation by the Bench. He then moved to have the evidence of Messrs. Gist and McDowell recorded, with as little effect. His next motion, which was for a new trial, shared the same fate. He then moved it might be admitted to record, “that he had made a motion for a new trial, because he considered the verdict contrary to evidence, and that the motion had been rejected;” which, after much altercation, was agreed to. He lastly moved for an appeal, which, too, was granted. This, sir, as well as I can remember, is a just and impartial narrative of the most material occurrences in the trial of that cause. One occurrence more, tho’ not essential to the cause, I can’t help mentioning, as a striking instance of the loyalty, impartiality and attachment of the Bench to the Church of England in particular, and to religion at large. Mr. Henry, mentioned above (who had been called in by the Defendants, as we suspected, to do what I some time ago told you of ),  after Mr. Lyons had opened the cause, rose and harangued the jury for near an hour. This harangue turned upon points as much out of his own depth, and that of the jury, as they were foreign from the purpose; which it would be impertinent to mention here. However, after he had discussed those points, he labored to prove “that the act of 1758 had every characteristic of a good law; that it was a law of general utility, and could not, consistently with what he called the original compact between King and people, stipulating protection on the one hand and obedience on the other be annulled.” Hence, he inferred, “that a King, by disallowing Acts of this salutary nature, from being the father of his people, degenerated into a Tyrant, and forfeits all right to his subjects’ obedience.” He further urged, “that the only use of an Established Church and Clergy in society, is to enforce obedience to civil sanctions, and the observance of those which are called duties of imperfect obligation; that, when a Clergy ceases to answer these ends, the community have no further need of their ministry, and may justly strip them of their appointments; that the Clergy of Virginia, in this particular instance of their refusing to acquiesce in the law in question, had been so far from answering, that they had most notoriously counteracted, those great ends of their institution; that, therefore, instead of useful members of the state, they ought to be considered as enemies of the community; and that, in the case now before them, Mr. Maury, instead of countenance, and protection and damages, very justly deserved to be punished with signal severity.” And then he perorates to the following purpose, “that excepting they (the jury) were disposed to rivet the chains of bondage on their own necks, he hoped they would not let slip the opportunity which now offered, of making such an example of him as might, hereafter, be a warning to himself and his brethren, not to have the temerity, for the future, to dispute the validity of such laws, authenticated by the only authority, which, in his conception, could give force to laws for the government of this Colony, the authority of a legal representative of a Council, and of a kind and benevolent and patriot Governor.” You’ll observe I do not pretend to remember his words, but take this to have been the sum and substance of this part of his labored oration. When he came to that part of it where he undertook to assert, “ that a King, by annulling or disallowing acts of so salutary a nature, from being the Father of his people degenerated into a Tyrant, and forfeits all right to his subjects’ obedience;” the more sober part of the audience were struck with horror. Mr. Lyons called out aloud, and with an honest warmth, to the Bench, “ That the gentleman had spoken treason,” and expressed his astonishment” that their worships could hear it without emotion, or any mark of dissatisfaction.”
At the same instant, too, amongst some gentlemen in the crowd behind me, was a confused murmur of Treason, Treason! Yet Mr. Henry went on in the same treasonable and licentious strain, without interruption from the Bench, nay, even without receiving the least exterior notice of their disapprobation. One of the jury, too, was so highly pleased with these doctrines, that, as I was afterwards told, he every now and then gave the traitorous declaimer a nod of approbation.
 Patrick Henry of Virginia
After the Court was adjourned, Mr. Henry apologised to me for what he had said, alleging that his sole view in engaging in the cause, and in saying what he had, was to render himself popular.  You see, then, it is so clear a point in this person’s opinion, that the ready road to popularity here, is, to trample under foot the interests of religion, the rights of the church, and the prerogative of the Crown. If this be not pleading for the “assumption of a power to bind the King’s hands,” if it be not asserting “such supremacy in provincial Legislatures” as is inconsistent with the dignity of the Church of England, and manifestly tends to draw the people of these plantations from their allegiance to the King, tell me, my dear sir, what is so, if you can.
 " the block "
Mr. Cootes, merchant on James River, after Court, said “he would have given a considerable sum out of his own pocket, rather than his friend Patrick should have been guilty of a crime, but little, if any thing inferior to that which brought  Simon Lord Lovatt to the block ;”  and justly observed that he exceeded the most seditious and inflammatory harangues of the Tribunes of old Rome.
My warmest wishes and prayers ever attend you. And besides these there is little else in the power of, my dear Camm,[2]
your affectionate J. MAURY.
Sources[edit]
New Lights[edit]
NEW LIGHTS on a jury would have been biased against the established church of England under the power of the king and therefore already against all ministers of that religious doctrine. Thus the jury is biased against the ministers at trial from the beginning if only from these "Dissenters" (but they were the only jurors against the twenty ministers at trial.) This is why the Reverend James Maury declared he did not agree with the picked juriors and mentions them to the Reverend John Camm in his letter.
[1a.]Wikipedia "New and Old Lights"
[1b.]Wikipedia: Jonathan Edwards (theologian)
[1c.]Wikipedia: George Whitefield
[1d.]"New Lights." Encyclopedia of American History. Answers Corporation, 2006. Answers.com 05 Nov. 2009. http://www.answers.com/topic/new-lights
George Whitefield, an English evangelist who appeared in New England in 1740, gave impetus to a religious movement, led by Jonathan Edwards, that propounded the doctrine of sanctification by faith alone. The New Lights, as they came to be known, split the Congregational establishment in New England, swelled the numbers of Baptists in the South, and drained parishioners away from the Anglican and Presbyterian Churches everywhere. Charismatic preachers such as Whitefield and Gilbert Tennent staged massive revivals across New England. Though denounced by Old Lights like Charles Chauncey as madmen and apostates, New Lights gained ground until the 1770s. They founded several of the Ivy League universities, and their continuing influence set the stage for the evangelical revivals, led by the Baptists and Methodists, of the next century.
Body Text[edit]
[2] Reverend John Camm of Virginia, plaintiff and appellant.
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1432
Cached time: 20221006014641
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.060 seconds
Real time usage: 0.113 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 250/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 8866/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4062/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 220/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.024/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1464516/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%   91.808      1 -total
 86.67%   79.566      1 Template:Header
 11.25%   10.328      1 Template:Center
  9.22%    8.462      1 Template:Header/main_block
  4.34%    3.989      1 Template:Optional_style
  1.93%    1.770      1 Template:Right
  1.33%    1.220      1 Template:Is_number
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:556268-0!canonical and timestamp 20221006014641 and revision id 9625723.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Maury,_Reverend_James_vs_Henry,_Patrick_--_%22The_Parson%27s_Opinion_Of_The_Parson%27s_Cause%22&oldid=9625723"
Category: 1763 works
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 30 September 2019, at 14:18.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Aviation Accident Report: American Airlines Flight 29 - Wikisource, the free online library
Aviation Accident Report: American Airlines Flight 29 - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Aviation Accident Report: American Airlines Flight 29
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Aviation Accident Report: American Airlines Flight 29 by the Civil Aeronautics Boardrelated portals: Civil Aeronautics Board.sister projects: Wikidata item.
2132967Aviation Accident Report: American Airlines Flight 29by the Civil Aeronautics Board
​
CIVIL AERONAUTICS BOARD
WASHINGTON, D.C.
FOR RELEASE:
REPORT OF THE CIVIL AERONAUTICS BOARD
of the
Investigation of an Accident Involving Aircraft
in Scheduled Air Carrier Operation
2893-40
An accident involving a Douglas, Model DC-3 (NC19974), owned by American Airlines, Inc., which occurred at Brainard Field, Hartford, Connecticut, on September 3, 1940, about 7:00 a.m., resulted in extensive damage to the aircraft and minor injury to one passenger, C. B. Cronnan. Thirteen other passengers and the crew of three were not injured. Captain W. J. Cheney, who held an airline transport certificate and who had logged about 4350 flying hours, was in command of the flight. He was assisted by First Officer C. E. Higbee, who held a commercial pilot certificate and who had flown about 1175 hours. Kathleen Regan was serving as stewardess.
The airplane took off from Boston at 6:10 a.m. on a scheduled flight (American's Trip 29) to New York City, with an intermediate stop at Hartford. At 6:49 a.m., when the airplane passed over the Hartford radio range station at 2000 feet, the ground was obliterated by dense ground fog. The last Weather Bureau sequence report for Hartford issued at 6:35 a.m., gave "High scattered clouds, visibility 1/2 mile, ground fog, temperature 62, dewpoint 62, barometer 22.99, wind calm." The Captain ordered the wheels lowered and started a descent to look over the field. According to Captain Chaney, he passed over the field twice and observed several holes in the ground fog which varied from light to moderate intensity. He states that he made an approach toward the west-northwest and got under the fog, but went around again, waiting for conditions to improve. On his next attempt, an approach toward the southeast, he stated the field was open except for light patchy ground fog about 100 feet thick on the edges of the field. The Captain stated that he could see one pole of the high tension wires as he passed over them at an altitude of 100 feet and that he was 50 feet above the ground as he passed the field boundary at which time he could see 3/4 the length of the field, but that before the plane touched the ground he could see its entire length. According to his statement, he decided to land on the grass-covered area east of the runway because in doing so he could use the Administration Building as a marker in lining up for a straight landing and also because the portion of the field was clearer of ground fog than the western part of the field. The airplane overshot 2,450 feet of the available landing area of 3,880 feet. The wheels first touched the ground on the grass approximately 152 feet east of the runway and the airplane continued its landing roll parallel to the runway. Although the pilot applied brakes, he was unable to stop the airplane on the wet ground, and it continued beyond the boundary of the airport onto the soft, bumpy ground. After two or three bumps it stopped, nosed up, and fell back sharply on its tail.
 ​Investigation revealed that, before departure from Boston, the trip had been cleared from that point to LaGuardia Field, New York, with Floyd Bennett Field as an alternate. When it became apparent from a later weather report that conditions at Hartford were below the minimum prescribed by the Civil Aeronautics Administration, the trip was contacted by radio, at 6:26 a.m., and Philadelphia was named as an additional alternate in accordance with approved procedure.
PROBABLE CAUSE:
Action of the pilot in attempting a landing under conditions
which were below the minimums set forth in the company's
weather letter of competency as approved by the Civil
Aeronautics Administration.
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work of the United States federal government (see 17 U.S.C. 105).
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1326
Cached time: 20221017211909
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.096 seconds
Real time usage: 0.148 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 555/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 18508/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4828/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 10/100
Expensive parser function count: 0/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 5911/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.033/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1456878/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  130.604      1 -total
 47.57%   62.125      1 Template:Header
 28.51%   37.240      1 Page:CAB_Accident_Report,_American_Airlines_Flight_29.pdf/1
 12.67%   16.548      2 Template:C
  9.02%   11.784      1 Template:PD-USGov
  7.77%   10.154      1 Template:License
  5.08%    6.631      1 Template:SIC
  4.56%    5.950      1 Template:Header/main_block
  3.87%    5.056      1 Template:Tooltip
  3.86%    5.044      2 Template:Optional_style
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:2132967-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211909 and revision id 6413411.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Aviation_Accident_Report:_American_Airlines_Flight_29&oldid=6413411"
Categories: PD-USGov1940s worksHidden category: Pages with override author
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageSourceDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 31 August 2016, at 10:16.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Proclamation 7859 - Wikisource, the free online library
Proclamation 7859 - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Proclamation 7859
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
←George W. Bush's Presidential Proclamations
Proclamation 7859 by George W. Bush 
    sister projects: Wikipedia article, Wikidata item.
Delivered on 1 January 2005.
60129Proclamation 7859George W. Bush
By the President of the United States of AmericaA Proclamation
As a mark of respect for the victims of the Indian Ocean Earthquake and the resulting Tsunamis, I hereby order, by the authority vested in me by the Constitution and laws of the United States of America, that the flag of the United States shall be flown at half-staff at the White House and on all public buildings and grounds, at all military posts and naval stations, and on all naval vessels of the Federal Government in the District of Columbia and throughout the United States and its Territories and possessions from Monday, January 3, 2005, until sunset, Friday, January 7, 2005. I also direct that the flag shall be flown at half-staff for the same period at all United States embassies, legations, consular offices, and other facilities abroad, including all military facilities and naval vessels and stations.
In Witness Whereof, I have hereunto set my hand this first day of January, in the year of our Lord two thousand five, and of the Independence of the United States of America the two hundred and twenty-ninth.
George W. Bush
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work of the United States federal government (see 17 U.S.C. 105).
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1364
Cached time: 20221017211910
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.101 seconds
Real time usage: 0.136 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 261/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 10838/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2880/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 6/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 220/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.061/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 2801182/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 2/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  121.762      1 -total
 81.81%   99.617      1 Template:Header
  9.20%   11.198      1 Template:PD-USGov
  8.85%   10.781      1 Template:Center
  8.03%    9.772      1 Template:License
  6.57%    8.004      1 Template:Header/main_block
  3.46%    4.215      1 Template:Optional_style
  3.18%    3.868      1 Template:License_scope
  1.48%    1.799      1 Template:License_grammar
  1.12%    1.364      1 Template:W
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:60129-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211909 and revision id 11572131.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Proclamation_7859&oldid=11572131"
Category: PD-USGov
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 7 August 2021, at 05:35.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Presidential Radio Address - 2 October 1993 - Wikisource, the free online library
Presidential Radio Address - 2 October 1993 - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Presidential Radio Address - 2 October 1993
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
←Clinton's Presidential Radio Addresses
Presidential Radio Address  (1993)  by William Jefferson Clinton 
    sister projects: Wikidata item.
Weekly radio address delivered by U.S. President Bill Clinton on October 2, 1993.
6829Presidential Radio Address1993William Jefferson Clinton
Good morning. This week the good will and hopefulness that surrounded the announcement of our health security plan continued to grow. A consensus is developing that our central goal, comprehensive health benefits for you and your family that can never be taken away, is now within reach and must be achieved. For the first time in our lifetimes, the question before Congress is no longer whether to provide health security but how.
Something unique is happening here in Washington: A coalition is taking shape across political boundaries, a coalition concerned more with passing health care than with scoring political points. And when the Congress passes health care reform, it won't have a label that says Democrat or Republican, it will be delivered to you with a label that says made in America.
This week as Congress began its deliberations, health care reform and the American people have had an extraordinary advocate on their side, the First Lady. Before, in our history, only Eleanor Roosevelt and Rosalynn Carter have testified before Congress. I'm proud of the intellect and compassion and the leadership Hillary is bringing to this issue and to our country. Her commitment to health care is a human issue. She says to find a solution, it must pass the "mom test," something that she could explain to her mother and her mother would support. That certainly has cut through the heart of a very complex health care debate.
During her testimony before the Senate Finance Committee this week, something extraordinary happened: Republican Senator James Jeffords of Vermont, a leading expert on health care, stepped forward and endorsed our plan. I'm sure that after the acrimony of the budget debate, this cooperative spirit comes as welcome news to all of you as it does to me. Solving health care must remain above politics. Indeed, I hope every one of our legislative efforts in the months ahead is done in the same bipartisan spirit.  I've said since the beginning of this debate, I welcome—I need—good ideas and options from everyone. No party, no person, no segment of the health care community owns all the good ideas. After all, it was a Republican President, Richard Nixon, who first recommended over 20 years ago extending health coverage by asking every employer to take responsibility for paying some of his employees' health care costs. A current Republican Senator, Bob Packwood of Oregon, sponsored that bill 20 years ago.  Already the fruits of bipartisan cooperation are visible. In just a few months, we've moved from deep alarm over health care to designing a proposal, to crafting a solution. As I said, we don't have all the answers, and we know that. But we have to find them, and we do have a plan.
I believe this plan will work. It will guarantee comprehensive health benefits to every one of you. It's based on the notion of preserving and protecting what is best about American health care and fixing what has gone wrong.
My goal is to make the world's finest private health care system work better and work for everyone. We've rejected a big Government solution. We've rejected broad-based taxes. We've insisted that small business be protected. And I embrace the compassionate American view that no one should go without health care.
This plan will drastically cut the paperwork that now clogs the American health care system. It will maintain the highest quality health care, and it will retain your right to choose your doctors. In fact, for most of you, your choices in health care will increase, not decrease, if this plan passes.
The plan will keep health care costs down by controlling spending, by providing free preventive care that keeps us healthy and saves money in the long run. It also asks all of us to take more responsibility for paying for a health care system that all of us use but only some of us pay for.
We also ask everyone, every American, to take more responsibility for personal behavior. Just as insurance companies and doctors and lawyers and the Government must take more responsibility upon themselves to make the system work better, so must each individual. It is the common sense and shared values of our health security plan that are bringing people of all political persuasions to the cause.
I watched some of Hillary's testimony. I wish I could have seen more. We spent a lot of time talking together about what she learned from the Congress and how we can make health care a reality for each of you. I think we've done the responsible thing by accepting this challenge, a challenge too long delayed, and by beginning a truly constructive bipartisan debate on what many have characterized as the most important piece of domestic legislation in a generation.
And I believe that once we succeed in providing health security to each of you, every family will have a chance to prosper and dream again, freed from today's fears: freed from the fear that if you lose your job, you'll lose your health care; if your business goes down, you'll never have health care coverage; if you get sick and you really need it, you won't have health care. Those fears have to be done away with.
As we move forward we'll continue to carry with us the indelible memory of the thousands of people we've talked to who have tangled with the health care system and lost, of the thousands who live in fear of losing their health care, and to the plight of so many of you who have played by the rules and lost to a system that often doesn't follow them. Once heard, no one forgets those voices.
Thank you for making this a great beginning, and thanks for listening.
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work of the United States federal government (see 17 U.S.C. 105).
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1455
Cached time: 20221017211910
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.050 seconds
Real time usage: 0.074 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 287/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 11157/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2880/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 0/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.023/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1451052/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%   60.243      1 -total
 82.86%   49.920      1 Template:Header
 16.98%   10.228      1 Template:PD-USGov
 15.08%    9.086      1 Template:Header/main_block
 14.73%    8.872      1 Template:License
  6.67%    4.018      1 Template:License_scope
  2.76%    1.663      1 Template:License_grammar
  2.51%    1.515      1 Template:Is_number
  1.99%    1.198      1 Template:W
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:6829-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211910 and revision id 11570276.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Presidential_Radio_Address_-_2_October_1993&oldid=11570276"
Categories: PD-USGovPresidential radio addresses of William Jefferson Clinton in 1993Hidden category: Pages with noyearcat
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 6 August 2021, at 19:20.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Angel v. Bullington - Wikisource, the free online library
Angel v. Bullington - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Angel v. Bullington
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
Angel v. Bullington by Felix FrankfurterSyllabusrelated portals: Supreme Court of the United States.sister projects: Wikidata item.
901122Angel v. Bullington — SyllabusFelix Frankfurter
Court Documents
Opinion of the Court
United States Supreme Court330 U.S. 183Angel  v.  Bullington Argued: Nov. 18, 19, 1946. --- Decided: Feb 17, 1947
Mr. George Lyle Jones, of Asheville, N.C., for petitioner.
Mr. R. Roy Rush, of Roanoke, Va., for respondent.
R. Justice FRANKFURTER delivered the opinion of the Court. 
Notes[edit]
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it is a work of the United States federal government (see 17 U.S.C. 105).
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1327
Cached time: 20221017211910
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.075 seconds
Real time usage: 0.107 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 480/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 13570/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3360/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 7/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 0/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.033/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1456682/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%   85.066      1 -total
 75.59%   64.300      1 Template:Header
 13.60%   11.572      1 Template:PD-USGov
 11.92%   10.139      1 Template:License
  7.25%    6.170      1 Template:Header/main_block
  5.76%    4.897      1 Template:CaseCaption
  4.77%    4.056      1 Template:License_scope
  2.94%    2.499      2 Template:Uc
  2.89%    2.460      1 Template:USSCcase
  2.43%    2.065      1 Template:License_grammar
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:901122-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211910 and revision id 2992803.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Angel_v._Bullington&oldid=2992803"
Categories: United States Supreme Court decisionsUnited States Supreme Court decisions in Volume 330PD-USGovHidden categories: Case missing lower courtCase missing case numberUncategorized United States Supreme Court decision
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 25 June 2011, at 10:58.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
The Witch of Aleppo - Wikisource, the free online library
The Witch of Aleppo - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
The Witch of Aleppo
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
    The Witch of Aleppo  (1924)  by Harold LambChapter 1→
information about this edition. sister projects: Wikidata item.
Extracted from Adventure  magazine,  Vol 44, 30 January 1924, pp. 1-69.  Accompanying  illustration (for the magazine cover) by P. N. Merrill. [#Demid, Ayub]. The koshevoi—the chief of the Cossacks' warrior bands—has been kidnapped, and a king's ransom  demanded. The coffers are empty. Can Demid and Ayub  plunder enough  in time? Failure means the chief's beheading.
3101112The Witch of Aleppo1924Harold Lamb
THE WITCH OF ALEPPO
A COMPLETE NOVEL
by Harold Lamb
Author of “Men from Below,” “The King Dies,” etc. 
CONTENTS
Chapter I. In Barracks
Chapter II. The Gallows Birds
Chapter III. The Straight Sword
Chapter IV. Ayub Casts A Net
Chapter V. The ways of the sea are blind ways
Chapter VI. Ibnol Hammamgi
Chapter VIII. Lali Makes A Promise
Chapter VIII. Where his grave is dug there shall a man die
Chapter IX. The Voice In The Darkness
Chapter X. The Zineh Of Allepo
Chapter XI. Ayub Issues A Challenge
Chapter XII. A woman's wit is sharp as the dagger of a Rifi thief
Chapter XIII. Where the road ends the warriors dismount
Copyright. 1924, by The Ridgway Company in the States and Great Britain. All rights reserved. 
This work is in the public domain in the United States because it was published before January 1, 1927.
The author died in 1962, so this work is also in the public domain in countries and areas where the copyright term is the author's life plus 50 years or less. This work may also be in the public domain in countries and areas with longer native copyright terms that apply the rule of the shorter term to foreign works.
Public domainPublic domainfalsefalse
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1320
Cached time: 20221017211911
Cache expiry: 86400
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐page‐id]
CPU time usage: 0.111 seconds
Real time usage: 0.160 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 871/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 43000/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9279/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1953/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.031/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1449459/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  136.945      1 -total
 49.17%   67.336      1 Template:Header
 15.57%   21.323      1 Template:Bc
 11.20%   15.331      1 Template:Center
 10.39%   14.223      1 Template:Plainlist
  9.14%   12.514      1 Template:PD/US
  8.07%   11.056      1 Template:Header/main_block
  7.14%    9.776      1 Template:PD-old-50-US
  5.72%    7.830      1 Template:PD-old/US
  4.73%    6.483      1 Template:Heading
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:3101112-0!canonical and timestamp 20221017211910 and revision id 11726179.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=The_Witch_of_Aleppo&oldid=11726179"
Categories: 1924 worksHistorical fictionAdventure novelsMystery novelsThriller novelsCossacksNovels in periodicalsPD-old-50-USHidden category: Works using categories parameter
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 26 September 2021, at 06:40.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
Tax Extenders and Alternative Minimum Tax Relief Act of 2008 - Wikisource, the free online library
Tax Extenders and Alternative Minimum Tax Relief Act of 2008 - Wikisource, the free online library
 CentralNotice 
Download
Tax Extenders and Alternative Minimum Tax Relief Act of 2008
From Wikisource
Jump to navigation
Jump to search
←Division B:Energy Improvement and Extension Act of 2008
Public Law 110-343 United States CongressDivision C: Tax Extenders and Alternative Minimum Tax Relief Act of 2008 
    sister projects: Wikidata item.
Pub.L. 110−343, 122 Stat. 3765
409814Public Law 110-343 — Division C: Tax Extenders and Alternative Minimum Tax Relief Act of 2008United States Congress
==DIVISION C — TAX EXTENDERS AND ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM TAX RELIEF==
Sec. 1.  Short Title; Amendment Of 1986 Code; Table Of Contents.[edit]
(a) Short Title.—
This division may be cited as the ``Tax Extenders and Alternative Minimum Tax Relief Act of 2008´´.
(b) Amendment of 1986 Code.—
Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this division an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
(c) Table of Contents.—
The table of contents of this division is as follows:
Contents
1 Sec. 1.  Short Title; Amendment Of 1986 Code; Table Of Contents.
2 TITLE I—ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM TAX RELIEF
2.1 Sec. 101. Extension Of Alternative Minimum Tax Relief For Nonrefundable Personal Credits.
2.2 Sec. 102. Extension Of Increased Alternative Minimum Tax Exemption Amount.
2.3 Sec. 103. Increase Of Amt Refundable Credit Amount For Individuals With Long-term Unused Credits For Prior Year Minimum Tax Liability, Etc.
3 TITLE II—EXTENSION OF INDIVIDUAL TAX PROVISIONS
3.1 Sec. 201. Deduction For State And Local Sales Taxes.
3.2 Sec. 202. Deduction Of Qualified Tuition And Related Expenses.
3.3 Sec. 203. Deduction For Certain Expenses Of Elementary And Secondary School Teachers.
3.4 Sec. 204. Additional Standard Deduction For Real Property Taxes For Nonitemizers.
3.5 Sec. 205. Tax-free Distributions From Individual Retirement Plans For Charitable Purposes.
3.6 Sec. 206. Treatment Of Certain Dividends Of Regulated Investment Companies.
3.7 Sec. 207. Stock in RIC For Purposes Of Determining Estates Of Nonresidents Not Citizens.
3.8 Sec. 208. Qualified Investment Entities.
4 TITLE III—EXTENSION OF BUSINESS TAX PROVISIONS
4.1 Sec. 301. Extension And Modification Of Research Credit.
4.2 Sec. 302. New Markets Tax Credit.
4.3 Sec. 303. Subpart F Exception For Active Financing Income.
4.4 Sec. 304. Extension Of Look-thru Rule For Related Controlled Foreign Corporations.
4.5 Sec. 305. Extension Of 15-year Straight-line Cost Recovery For Qualified Leasehold Improvements And Qualified Restaurant Improvements; 15-year Straight-line Cost Recovery For Certain Improvements To Retail Space.
4.6 Sec. 306. Modification Of Tax Treatment Of Certain Payments To Controlling Exempt Organizations.
4.7 Sec. 307. Basis Adjustment To Stock Of S Corporations Making Charitable Contributions Of Property.
4.8 Sec. 308. Increase In Limit On Cover Over Of Rum Excise Tax To Puerto Rico And The Virgin Islands.
4.9 Sec. 309. Extension Of Economic Development Credit For American Samoa.
4.10 Sec. 310. Extension Of Mine Rescue Team Training Credit.
4.11 Sec. 311. Extension Of Election To Expense Advanced Mine Safety Equipment.
4.12 Sec. 312. Deduction Allowable With Respect To Income Attributable To Domestic Production Activities In Puerto Rico.
4.13 Sec. 313. Qualified Zone Academy Bonds.
4.14 Sec. 314. Indian Employment Credit.
4.15 Sec. 315. Accelerated Depreciation For Business Property On Indian Reservations.
4.16 Sec. 316. Railroad Track Maintenance.
4.17 Sec. 317. Seven-year Cost Recovery Period For Motorsports Racing Track Facility.
4.18 Sec. 318. Expensing Of Environmental Remediation Costs.
4.19 Sec. 319. Extension Of Work Opportunity Tax Credit For Hurricane Katrina Employees.
4.20 Sec. 320. Extension Of Increased Rehabilitation Credit For Structures In The Gulf Opportunity Zone.
4.21 Sec. 321. Enhanced Deduction For Qualified Computer Contributions.
4.22 Sec. 322. Tax Incentives For Investment In The District Of Columbia.
4.23 Sec. 323. Enhanced Charitable Deductions For Contributions Of Food Inventory.
4.24 Sec. 324. Extension Of Enhanced Charitable Deduction For Contributions Of Book Inventory.
4.25 Sec. 325. Extension And Modification Of Duty Suspension On Wool Products; Wool Research Fund; Wool Duty Refunds.
5 TITLE IV—EXTENSION OF TAX ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS
5.1 Sec. 401. Permanent Authority For Undercover Operations.
5.2 Sec. 402. Permanent Authority For Disclosure Of Information Relating To Terrorist Activities.
6 TITLE V—ADDITIONAL TAX RELIEF AND OTHER TAX PROVISIONS
6.1 Subtitle A—General Provisions
6.1.1 Sec. 501. $8,500 Income Threshold Used To Calculate Refundable Portion Of Child Tax Credit.
6.1.2 Sec. 502. Provisions Related To Film And Television Productions.
6.1.3 Sec. 503. Exemption From Excise Tax For Certain Wooden Arrows Designed For Use By Children.
6.1.4 Sec. 504. Income Averaging For Amounts Received In Connection With The Exxon Valdez Litigation.
6.1.5 Sec. 505. Certain Farming Business Machinery And Equipment Treated As 5-year Property.
6.1.6 Sec. 506. Modification Of Penalty On Understatement Of Taxpayer's Liability By Tax Return Preparer.
6.2 Subtitle B—Paul Wellstone and Pete Domenici Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008
6.2.1 Sec. 511. Short Title.
6.2.2 Sec. 512. Mental Health Parity.
7 TITLE VI—OTHER PROVISIONS
7.1 Sec. 601. Secure Rural Schools And Community Self-determination Program.
7.2 Sec. 602. Transfer To Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund.
8 TITLE VII—DISASTER RELIEF
8.1 Subtitle A—Heartland and Hurricane Ike Disaster Relief
8.1.1 Sec. 701. Short Title.
8.1.2 Sec. 702. Temporary Tax Relief For Areas Damaged By 2008 Midwestern Severe Storms, Tornados, And Flooding.
8.1.3 Sec. 703. Reporting Requirements Relating To Disaster Relief Contributions.
8.1.4 Sec. 704. Temporary Tax-exempt Bond Financing And Low-income Housing Tax Relief For Areas Damaged By Hurricane Ike.
8.2 Subtitle B—National Disaster Relief
8.2.1 Sec. 706. Losses Attributable To Federally Declared Disasters.
8.2.2 Sec. 707. Expensing Of Qualified Disaster Expenses.
8.2.3 Sec. 708. Net Operating Losses Attributable To Federally Declared Disasters.
8.2.4 Sec. 709. Waiver Of Certain Mortgage Revenue Bond Requirements Following Federally Declared Disasters.
8.2.5 Sec. 710. Special Depreciation Allowance For Qualified Disaster Property.
8.2.6 Sec. 711. Increased Expensing For Qualified Disaster Assistance Property.
8.2.7 Sec. 712. Coordination With Heartland Disaster Relief.
9 TITLE VIII—SPENDING REDUCTIONS AND APPROPRIATE REVENUE RAISERS FOR NEW TAX RELIEF POLICY
9.1 Sec. 801. Nonqualified Deferred Compensation From Certain Tax Indifferent Parties.
TITLE I—ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM TAX RELIEF[edit]
Sec. 101. Extension Of Alternative Minimum Tax Relief For Nonrefundable Personal Credits.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Paragraph (2) of section 26(a) (relating to special rule for taxable years 2000 through 2007) is amended—
(1) by striking ``or 2007´´ and inserting ``2007, or 2008´´, and
(2) by striking ``2007´´ in the heading thereof and inserting ``2008´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 102. Extension Of Increased Alternative Minimum Tax Exemption Amount.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Paragraph (1) of section 55(d) (relating to exemption amount) is amended—
(1) by striking ``($66,250 in the case of taxable years beginning in 2007)´´ in subparagraph (A) and inserting ``($69,950 in the case of taxable years beginning in 2008)´´, and
(2) by striking ``($44,350 in the case of taxable years beginning in 2007)´´ in subparagraph (B) and inserting ``($46,200 in the case of taxable years beginning in 2008)´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 103. Increase Of Amt Refundable Credit Amount For Individuals With Long-term Unused Credits For Prior Year Minimum Tax Liability, Etc.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Paragraph (2) of section 53(e) is amended to read as follows:
``(2) AMT refundable credit amount.—For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `AMT refundable credit amount' means, with respect to any taxable year, the amount (not in excess of the long-term unused minimum tax credit for such taxable year) equal to the greater of—
``(A) 50 percent of the long-term unused minimum tax credit for such taxable year, or
``(B) the amount (if any) of the AMT refundable credit amount determined under this paragraph for the taxpayer's preceding taxable year (determined without regard to subsection (f)(2)).´´.
(b) Treatment of Certain Underpayments, Interest, and Penalties Attributable to the Treatment of Incentive Stock Options.—
Section 53 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
``(f) Treatment of Certain Underpayments, Interest, and Penalties Attributable to the Treatment of Incentive Stock Options.—
``(1) Abatement.—Any underpayment of tax outstanding on the date of the enactment of this subsection which is attributable to the application of section 56(b)(3) for any taxable year ending before January 1, 2008, and any interest or penalty with respect to such underpayment which is outstanding on such date of enactment, is hereby abated. The amount determined under subsection (b)(1) shall not include any tax abated under the preceding sentence.
``(2) Increase in credit for certain interest and penalties already paid.—The AMT refundable credit amount, and the minimum tax credit determined under subsection (b), for the taxpayer's first 2 taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007, shall each be increased by 50 percent of the aggregate amount of the interest and penalties which were paid by the taxpayer before the date of the enactment of this subsection and which would (but for such payment) have been abated under paragraph (1).´´.
(c) Effective Date.—
(1) In General.—
Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007.
(2) Abatement.—
Section 53(f)(1), as added by subsection (b), shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
TITLE II—EXTENSION OF INDIVIDUAL TAX PROVISIONS[edit]
Sec. 201. Deduction For State And Local Sales Taxes.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Subparagraph (I) of section 164(b)(5) is amended by striking ``January 1, 2008´´ and inserting ``January 1, 2010´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 202. Deduction Of Qualified Tuition And Related Expenses.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Subsection (e) of section 222 (relating to termination) is amended by striking ``December 31, 2007´´ and inserting ``December 31, 2009´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 203. Deduction For Certain Expenses Of Elementary And Secondary School Teachers.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Subparagraph (D) of section 62(a)(2) (relating to certain expenses of elementary and secondary school teachers) is amended by striking ``or 2007´´ and inserting ``2007, 2008, or 2009´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 204. Additional Standard Deduction For Real Property Taxes For Nonitemizers.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Subparagraph (C) of section 63(c)(1), as added by the Housing Assistance Tax Act of 2008, is amended by inserting ``or 2009´´ after ``2008´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2008.
Sec. 205. Tax-free Distributions From Individual Retirement Plans For Charitable Purposes.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Subparagraph (F) of section 408(d)(8) (relating to termination) is amended by striking ``December 31, 2007´´ and inserting ``December 31, 2009´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by this section shall apply to distributions made in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 206. Treatment Of Certain Dividends Of Regulated Investment Companies.[edit]
(a) Interest-Related Dividends.—
Subparagraph (C) of section 871(k)(1) (defining interest-related dividend) is amended by striking ``December 31, 2007´´ and inserting ``December 31, 2009´´.
(b) Short-Term Capital Gain Dividends.—
Subparagraph (C) of section 871(k)(2) (defining short-term capital gain dividend) is amended by striking ``December 31, 2007´´ and inserting ``December 31, 2009´´.
(c) Effective Date.—
The amendments made by this section shall apply to dividends with respect to taxable years of regulated investment companies beginning after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 207. Stock in RIC For Purposes Of Determining Estates Of Nonresidents Not Citizens.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Paragraph (3) of section 2105(d) (relating to stock in a RIC) is amended by striking ``December 31, 2007´´ and inserting ``December 31, 2009´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by this section shall apply to decedents dying after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 208. Qualified Investment Entities.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Clause (ii) of section 897(h)(4)(A) (relating to termination) is amended by striking ``December 31, 2007´´ and inserting ``December 31, 2009´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on January 1, 2008.
TITLE III—EXTENSION OF BUSINESS TAX PROVISIONS[edit]
Sec. 301. Extension And Modification Of Research Credit.[edit]
(a) Extension.—
(1) In General.—
Section 41(h) (relating to termination) is amended by striking ``December 31, 2007´´ and inserting ``December 31, 2009´´ in paragraph (1)(B).
(2) Conforming amendment.—
Subparagraph (D) of section 45C(b)(1) (relating to special rule) is amended by striking ``after December 31, 2007´´ and inserting ``after December 31, 2009´´.
(b) Termination of Alternative Incremental Credit.—
Section 41(h) is amended by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3), and by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new paragraph:
``(2) Termination of alternative incremental credit.—No election under subsection (c)(4) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2008.´´.
(c) Modification of Alternative Simplified Credit.—
Paragraph (5)(A) of section 41(c) (relating to election of alternative simplified credit) is amended by striking ``12 percent´´ and inserting ``14 percent (12 percent in the case of taxable years ending before January 1, 2009)´´.
(d) Technical Correction.—
Paragraph (3) of section 41(h) is amended to read as follows:
``(2) Computation for taxable year in which credit terminates.—In the case of any taxable year with respect to which this section applies to a number of days which is less than the total number of days in such taxable year—
``(A) the amount determined under subsection (c)(1)(B) with respect to such taxable year shall be the amount which bears the same ratio to such amount (determined without regard to this paragraph) as the number of days in such taxable year to which this section applies bears to the total number of days in such taxable year, and
``(B) for purposes of subsection (c)(5), the average qualified research expenses for the preceding 3 taxable years shall be the amount which bears the same ratio to such average qualified research expenses (determined without regard to this paragraph) as the number of days in such taxable year to which this section applies bears to the total number of days in such taxable year.´´.
(e) Effective Date.—
(1) In general.—
Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007.
(2) Extension.—
The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to amounts paid or incurred after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 302. New Markets Tax Credit.[edit]
Subparagraph (D) of section 45D(f)(1) (relating to national limitation on amount of investments designated) is amended by striking ``and 2008´´ and inserting ``2008, and 2009´´.
Sec. 303. Subpart F Exception For Active Financing Income.[edit]
(a) Exempt Insurance Income.—
Paragraph (10) of section 953(e) (relating to application) is amended—
(1) by striking ``January 1, 2009´´ and inserting ``January 1, 2010´´, and
(2) by striking ``December 31, 2008´´ and inserting ``December 31, 2009´´.
(b) Exception to Treatment as Foreign Personal Holding Company Income.—
Paragraph (9) of section 954(h) (relating to application) is amended by striking ``January 1, 2009´´ and inserting ``January 1, 2010´´.
Sec. 304. Extension Of Look-thru Rule For Related Controlled Foreign Corporations.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Subparagraph (C) of section 954(c)(6) (relating to application) is amended by striking ``January 1, 2009´´ and inserting ``January 1, 2010´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years of foreign corporations beginning after December 31, 2007, and to taxable years of United States shareholders with or within which such taxable years of foreign corporations end.
Sec. 305. Extension Of 15-year Straight-line Cost Recovery For Qualified Leasehold Improvements And Qualified Restaurant Improvements; 15-year Straight-line Cost Recovery For Certain Improvements To Retail Space.[edit]
(a) Extension of Leasehold and Restaurant Improvements.—
(1) In General.—
Clauses (iv) and (v) of section 168(e)(3)(E) (relating to 15-year property) are each amended by striking ``January 1, 2008´´ and inserting ``January 1, 2010´´.
(2) Effective date.—
The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2007.
(b) Treatment To Include New Construction.—
(1) In General.—
Paragraph (7) of section 168(e) (relating to classification of property) is amended to read as follows:
``(7) Qualified restaurant property.—
``(A) In general.—The term `qualified restaurant property' means any section 1250 property which is—
``(i) a building, if such building is placed in service after December 31, 2008, and before January 1, 2010, or
``(ii) an improvement to a building,
``if more than 50 percent of the building's square footage is devoted to preparation of, and seating for on-premises consumption of, prepared meals.
``(B) Exclusion from bonus depreciation.—Property described in this paragraph shall not be considered qualified property for purposes of subsection (k).´´.
(2) Effective date.—
The amendment made by this subsection shall apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2008.
(c) Recovery Period for Depreciation of Certain Improvements to Retail Space.—
(1) 15-year recovery period.—
Section 168(e)(3)(E) (relating to 15-year property) is amended by striking ``and´´ at the end of clause (vii), by striking the period at the end of clause (viii) and inserting ``, and´´, and by adding at the end the following new clause:
``(ix) any qualified retail improvement property placed in service after December 31, 2008, and before January 1, 2010.´´.
(2) Qualified retail improvement property.—
Section 168(e) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
``(8) Qualified retail improvement property.—
``(A) In general.—The term `qualified retail improvement property' means any improvement to an interior portion of a building which is nonresidential real property if—
``(i) such portion is open to the general public and is used in the retail trade or business of selling tangible personal property to the general public, and
``(ii) such improvement is placed in service more than 3 years after the date the building was first placed in service.
``(B) Improvements made by owner.—In the case of an improvement made by the owner of such improvement, such improvement shall be qualified retail improvement property (if at all) only so long as such improvement is held by such owner. Rules similar to the rules under paragraph (6)(B) shall apply for purposes of the preceding sentence.
``(C) Certain improvements not included.—Such term shall not include any improvement for which the expenditure is attributable to—
``(i) the enlargement of the building,
``(ii) any elevator or escalator,
``(iii) any structural component benefitting a common area, or
``(iv) the internal structural framework of the building.
``(D) Exclusion from bonus depreciation.—Property described in this paragraph shall not be considered qualified property for purposes of subsection (k).
``(E) Termination.—Such term shall not include any improvement placed in service after December 31, 2009.´´.
(3) Requirement to use straight line method.—
Section 168(b)(3) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
``(I) Qualified retail improvement property described in subsection (e)(8).´´.
(4) Alternative system.—
The table contained in section 168(g)(3)(B) is amended by inserting after the item relating to subparagraph (E)(viii) the following new item:
``(E)(ix)..................................................        39´´.
(5) Effective date.—
The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2008.
Sec. 306. Modification Of Tax Treatment Of Certain Payments To Controlling Exempt Organizations.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Clause (iv) of section 512(b)(13)(E) (relating to termination) is amended by striking ``December 31, 2007´´ and inserting ``December 31, 2009´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by this section shall apply to payments received or accrued after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 307. Basis Adjustment To Stock Of S Corporations Making Charitable Contributions Of Property.[edit]
(a) In General.—
The last sentence of section 1367(a)(2) (relating to decreases in basis) is amended by striking ``December 31, 2007´´ and inserting ``December 31, 2009´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by this section shall apply to contributions made in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 308. Increase In Limit On Cover Over Of Rum Excise Tax To Puerto Rico And The Virgin Islands.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Paragraph (1) of section 7652(f) is amended by striking ``January 1, 2008´´ and inserting ``January 1, 2010´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by this section shall apply to distilled spirits brought into the United States after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 309. Extension Of Economic Development Credit For American Samoa.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Subsection (d) of section 119 of division A of the Tax Relief and Health Care Act of 2006 is amended—
(1) by striking ``first two taxable years´´ and inserting ``first 4 taxable years´´, and
(2) by striking ``January 1, 2008´´ and inserting ``January 1, 2010´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 310. Extension Of Mine Rescue Team Training Credit.[edit]
Section 45N(e) (relating to termination) is amended by striking ``December 31, 2008´´ and inserting ``December 31, 2009´´.
Sec. 311. Extension Of Election To Expense Advanced Mine Safety Equipment.[edit]
Section 179E(g) (relating to termination) is amended by striking ``December 31, 2008´´ and inserting ``December 31, 2009´´.
Sec. 312. Deduction Allowable With Respect To Income Attributable To Domestic Production Activities In Puerto Rico.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Subparagraph (C) of section 199(d)(8) (relating to termination) is amended—
L:: (1) by striking ``first 2 taxable years´´ and inserting ``first 4 taxable years´´, and
(2) by striking ``January 1, 2008´´ and inserting ``January 1, 2010´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 313. Qualified Zone Academy Bonds.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Subpart I of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end the following new section:
``SEC. 54E. QUALIFIED ZONE ACADEMY BONDS.
``(a) Qualified Zone Academy Bonds.—For purposes of this subchapter, the term `qualified zone academy bond' means any bond issued as part of an issue if—
``(1) 100 percent of the available project proceeds of such issue are to be used for a qualified purpose with respect to a qualified zone academy established by an eligible local education agency,
``(2) the bond is issued by a State or local government within the jurisdiction of which such academy is located, and
``(3) the issuer—
``(A) designates such bond for purposes of this section,
``(B) certifies that it has written assurances that the private business contribution requirement of subsection (b) will be met with respect to such academy, and
``(C) certifies that it has the written approval of the eligible local education agency for such bond issuance.
``(b)  Private Business Contribution Requirement.—For purposes of subsection (a), the private business contribution requirement of this subsection is met with respect to any issue if the eligible local education agency that established the qualified zone academy has written commitments from private entities to make qualified contributions having a present value (as of the date of issuance of the issue) of not less than 10 percent of the proceeds of the issue.
``(c) Limitation on Amount of Bonds Designated.—
``(1) National limitation.—There is a national zone academy bond limitation for each calendar year. Such limitation is $400,000,000 for 2008 and 2009, and, except as provided in paragraph (4), zero thereafter.
``(2) Allocation of limitation.—The national zone academy bond limitation for a calendar year shall be allocated by the Secretary among the States on the basis of their respective populations of individuals below the poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget). The limitation amount allocated to a State under the preceding sentence shall be allocated by the State education agency to qualified zone academies within such State.
``(3) Designation subject to limitation amount.—The maximum aggregate face amount of bonds issued during any calendar year which may be designated under subsection (a) with respect to any qualified zone academy shall not exceed the limitation amount allocated to such academy under paragraph (2) for such calendar year.
``(4) Carryover of unused limitation.—
``(A) In general.—If for any calendar year—
``(i) the limitation amount for any State, exceeds
``(ii) the amount of bonds issued during such year which are designated under subsection (a) with respect to qualified zone academies within such State,
``the limitation amount for such State for the following calendar year shall be increased by the amount of such excess.
``(B) Limitation on carryover.—Any carryforward of a limitation amount may be carried only to the first 2 years following the unused limitation year. For purposes of the preceding sentence, a limitation amount shall be treated as used on a first-in first-out basis.
``(C) Coordination with section 1397e.—Any carryover determined under section 1397E(e)(4) (relating to carryover of unused limitation) with respect to any State to calendar year 2008 or 2009 shall be treated for purposes of this section as a carryover with respect to such State for such calendar year under subparagraph (A), and the limitation of subparagraph (B) shall apply to such carryover taking into account the calendar years to which such carryover relates.
``(d) Definitions.—For purposes of this section—
``(1) Qualified zone academy.—The term `qualified zone academy' means any public school (or academic program within a public school) which is established by and operated under the supervision of an eligible local education agency to provide education or training below the postsecondary level if—
``(A) such public school or program (as the case may be) is designed in cooperation with business to enhance the academic curriculum, increase graduation and employment rates, and better prepare students for the rigors of college and the increasingly complex workforce,
``(B) students in such public school or program (as the case may be) will be subject to the same academic standards and assessments as other students educated by the eligible local education agency,
``(C) the comprehensive education plan of such public school or program is approved by the eligible local education agency, and
``(D)(i) such public school is located in an empowerment zone or enterprise community (including any such zone or community designated after the date of the enactment of this section), or
``(ii) there is a reasonable expectation (as of the date of issuance of the bonds) that at least 35 percent of the students attending such school or participating in such program (as the case may be) will be eligible for free or reduced-cost lunches under the school lunch program established under the National School Lunch Act.
``(2) Eligible local education agency.—For purposes of this section, the term `eligible local education agency' means any local educational agency as defined in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
``(3) Qualified purpose.—The term `qualified purpose' means, with respect to any qualified zone academy—
``(A) rehabilitating or repairing the public school facility in which the academy is established,
``(B) providing equipment for use at such academy,
``(C) developing course materials for education to be provided at such academy, and
``(D) training teachers and other school personnel in such academy.
``(4) Qualified contributions.—The term `qualified contribution' means any contribution (of a type and quality acceptable to the eligible local education agency) of—
``(A) equipment for use in the qualified zone academy (including state-of-the-art technology and vocational equipment),
``(B) technical assistance in developing curriculum or in training teachers in order to promote appropriate market driven technology in the classroom,
``(C) services of employees as volunteer mentors,
``(D) internships, field trips, or other educational opportunities outside the academy for students, or
``(E) any other property or service specified by the eligible local education agency.´´.
(b) Conforming Amendments.—
(1) Paragraph (1) of section 54A(d), as amended by this Act, is amended by striking ``or´´ at the end of subparagraph (B), by inserting ``or´´ at the end of subparagraph (C), and by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following new subparagraph:
``(D) a qualified zone academy bond,´´.
(2) Subparagraph (C) of section 54A(d)(2), as amended by this Act, is amended by striking ``and´´ at the end of clause (ii), by striking the period at the end of clause (iii) and inserting ``, and´´, and by adding at the end the following new clause:
``(iv) in the case of a qualified zone academy bond, a purpose specified in section 54E(a)(1).´´.
(3) Section 1397E is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
``(m) Termination.—This section shall not apply to any obligation issued after the date of the enactment of the Tax Extenders and Alternative Minimum Tax Relief Act of 2008.´´.
(4) The table of sections for subpart I of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end the following new item:
``Sec. 54E. Qualified Zone Academy Bonds.´´.
(c) Effective Date.—
The amendments made by this section shall apply to obligations issued after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Sec. 314. Indian Employment Credit.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Subsection (f) of section 45A (relating to termination) is amended by striking ``December 31, 2007´´ and inserting ``December 31, 2009´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 315. Accelerated Depreciation For Business Property On Indian Reservations.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Paragraph (8) of section 168(j) (relating to termination) is amended by striking ``December 31, 2007´´ and inserting ``December 31, 2009´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by this section shall apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 316. Railroad Track Maintenance.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Subsection (f) of section 45G (relating to application of section) is amended by striking ``January 1, 2008´´ and inserting ``January 1, 2010´´.
(b) Credit Allowed Against Alternative Minimum Tax.—
Subparagraph (B) of section 38(c)(4), as amended by this Act, is amended—
(1) by redesignating clauses (v), (vi), and (vii) as clauses (vi), (vii), and (viii), respectively, and
(2) by inserting after clause (iv) the following new clause:
``(v) the credit determined under section 45G,´´.
(c) Effective Dates.—
(1) The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to expenditures paid or incurred during taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007.
(2) The amendments made by subsection (b) shall apply to credits determined under section 45G of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007, and to carrybacks of such credits.
Sec. 317. Seven-year Cost Recovery Period For Motorsports Racing Track Facility.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Subparagraph (D) of section 168(i)(15) (relating to termination) is amended by striking ``December 31, 2007´´ and inserting ``December 31, 2009´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by this section shall apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 318. Expensing Of Environmental Remediation Costs.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Subsection (h) of section 198 (relating to termination) is amended by striking ``December 31, 2007´´ and inserting ``December 31, 2009´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by this section shall apply to expenditures paid or incurred after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 319. Extension Of Work Opportunity Tax Credit For Hurricane Katrina Employees.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Paragraph (1) of section 201(b) of the Katrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005 is amended by striking ``2-year´´ and inserting ``4-year´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to individuals hired after August 27, 2007.
Sec. 320. Extension Of Increased Rehabilitation Credit For Structures In The Gulf Opportunity Zone.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Subsection (h) of section 1400N is amended by striking ``December 31, 2008´´ and inserting ``December 31, 2009´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by this section shall apply to expenditures paid or incurred after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Sec. 321. Enhanced Deduction For Qualified Computer Contributions.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Subparagraph (G) of section 170(e)(6) is amended by striking ``December 31, 2007´´ and inserting ``December 31, 2009´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by this section shall apply to contributions made during taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 322. Tax Incentives For Investment In The District Of Columbia.[edit]
(a) Designation of Zone.—
(1) In General.—
Subsection (f) of section 1400 is amended by striking ``2007´´ both places it appears and inserting ``2009´´.
(2) Effective date.—
The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to periods beginning after December 31, 2007.
(b) Tax-Exempt Economic Development Bonds.—
(1) In General.—
Subsection (b) of section 1400A is amended by striking ``2007´´ and inserting ``2009´´.
(2) Effective date.—
The amendment made by this subsection shall apply to bonds issued after December 31, 2007.
(c) Zero Percent Capital Gains Rate.—
(1) In General.—
Subsection (b) of section 1400B is amended by striking ``2008´´ each place it appears and inserting ``2010´´.
(2) Conforming Amendments.—
(A) Section 1400B(e)(2) is amended—
(i) by striking ``2012´´ and inserting ``2014´´, and
(ii) by striking ``2012´´ in the heading thereof and inserting ``2014´´.
(B) Section 1400B(g)(2) is amended by striking ``2012´´ and inserting ``2014´´.
(C) Section 1400F(d) is amended by striking ``2012´´ and inserting ``2014´´.
(3) Effective Dates.—
(A) Extension.—
The amendments made by paragraph (1) shall apply to acquisitions after December 31, 2007.
(B) Conforming Amendments.—
The amendments made by paragraph (2) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
(d) First-Time Homebuyer Credit.—
(1) In General.—
Subsection (i) of section 1400C is amended by striking ``2008´´ and inserting ``2010´´.
(2) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by this subsection shall apply to property purchased after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 323. Enhanced Charitable Deductions For Contributions Of Food Inventory.[edit]
(a) Increased Amount of Deduction.—
(1) In General.—
Clause (iv) of section 170(e)(3)(C) (relating to termination) is amended by striking ``December 31, 2007´´ and inserting ``December 31, 2009´´.
(2) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by this subsection shall apply to contributions made after December 31, 2007.
(b) Temporary Suspension of Limitations on Charitable Contributions.—
(1) In General.—
Section 170(b) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
``(3) Temporary suspension of limitations on charitable contributions.—In the case of a qualified farmer or rancher (as defined in paragraph (1)(E)(v)), any charitable contribution of food—
``(A) to which subsection (e)(3)(C) applies (without regard to clause (ii) thereof), and
``(B) which is made during the period beginning on the date of the enactment of this paragraph and before January 1, 2009,
``shall be treated for purposes of paragraph (1)(E) or (2)(B), whichever is applicable, as if it were a qualified conservation contribution which is made by a qualified farmer or rancher and which otherwise meets the requirements of such paragraph.´´.
(2) Effective date.—
The amendment made by this subsection shall apply to taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Sec. 324. Extension Of Enhanced Charitable Deduction For Contributions Of Book Inventory.[edit]
(a) Extension.—
Clause (iv) of section 170(e)(3)(D) (relating to termination) is amended by striking ``December 31, 2007´´ and inserting ``December 31, 2009´´.
(b) Clerical Amendment.—
Clause (iii) of section 170(e)(3)(D) (relating to certification by donee) is amended by inserting ``of books´´ after ``to any contribution´´.
(c) Effective Date.—
The amendments made by this section shall apply to contributions made after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 325. Extension And Modification Of Duty Suspension On Wool Products; Wool Research Fund; Wool Duty Refunds.[edit]
(a) Extension of Temporary Duty Reductions.—
Each of the following headings of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States is amended by striking the date in the effective period column and inserting ``12/31/2014´´:
(1) Heading 9902.51.11 (relating to fabrics of worsted wool).
(2) Heading 9902.51.13 (relating to yarn of combed wool).
(3) Heading 9902.51.14 (relating to wool fiber, waste, garnetted stock, combed wool, or wool top).
(4) Heading 9902.51.15 (relating to fabrics of combed wool).
(5) Heading 9902.51.16 (relating to fabrics of combed wool).
(b) Extension of Duty Refunds and Wool Research Trust Fund.—
(1) In General.—
Section 4002(c) of the Wool Suit and Textile Trade Extension Act of 2004 (Public Law 108-429; 118 Stat. 2603) is amended—
(A) in paragraph (3)(C), by striking ``2010´´ and inserting ``2015´´; and
(B) in paragraph (6)(A), by striking ``through 2009´´ and inserting ``through 2014´´.
(2) Sunset.—
Section 506(f) of the Trade and Development Act of 2000 (Public 106-200; 114 Stat. 303 (7 U.S.C. 7101 note)) is amended by striking ``2010´´ and inserting ``2015´´.
TITLE IV—EXTENSION OF TAX ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS[edit]
Sec. 401. Permanent Authority For Undercover Operations.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Section 7608(c) (relating to rules relating to undercover operations) is amended by striking paragraph (6).
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by this section shall apply to operations conducted after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Sec. 402. Permanent Authority For Disclosure Of Information Relating To Terrorist Activities.[edit]
(a) Disclosure of Return Information To Apprise Appropriate Officials of Terrorist Activities.—
Subparagraph (C) of section 6103(i)(3) is amended by striking clause (iv).
(b) Disclosure Upon Request of Information Relating to Terrorist Activities.—
Paragraph (7) of section 6103(i) is amended by striking subparagraph (E).
(c) Effective Date.—
The amendments made by this section shall apply to disclosures after the date of the enactment of this Act.
TITLE V—ADDITIONAL TAX RELIEF AND OTHER TAX PROVISIONS[edit]
Subtitle A—General Provisions[edit]
Sec. 501. $8,500 Income Threshold Used To Calculate Refundable Portion Of Child Tax Credit.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Section 24(d) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
``(4) Special rule for 2008.—Notwithstanding paragraph (3), in the case of any taxable year beginning in 2008, the dollar amount in effect for such taxable year under paragraph (1)(B)(i) shall be $8,500.´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 502. Provisions Related To Film And Television Productions.[edit]
(a) Extension of Expensing Rules for Qualified Film and Television Productions.—
Section 181(f) (relating to termination) is amended by striking ``December 31, 2008´´ and inserting ``December 31, 2009´´.
(b) Modification of Limitation on Expensing.—
Subparagraph (A) of section 181(a)(2) is amended to read as follows:
``(A) In general.—Paragraph (1) shall not apply to so much of the aggregate cost of any qualified film or television production as exceeds $15,000,000.´´.
(c) Modifications to Deduction for Domestic Activities.—
(1) Determination of w-2 wages.—
Paragraph (2) of section 199(b) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
``(D) Special rule for qualified film.—In the case of a qualified film, such term shall include compensation for services performed in the United States by actors, production personnel, directors, and producers.´´.
(2) Definition of qualified film.—
Paragraph (6) of section 199(c) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``A qualified film shall include any copyrights, trademarks, or other intangibles with respect to such film. The methods and means of distributing a qualified film shall not affect the availability of the deduction under this section.´´.
(3) Partnerships.—
Subparagraph (A) of section 199(d)(1) is amended by striking ``and´´ at the end of clause (ii), by striking the period at the end of clause (iii) and inserting ``, and´´, and by adding at the end the following new clause:
``(iv) in the case of each partner of a partnership, or shareholder of an S corporation, who owns (directly or indirectly) at least 20 percent of the capital interests in such partnership or of the stock of such S corporation—
``(I) such partner or shareholder shall be treated as having engaged directly in any film produced by such partnership or S corporation, and
``(II) such partnership or S corporation shall be treated as having engaged directly in any film produced by such partner or shareholder.´´.
(d) Conforming Amendment.—
Section 181(d)(3)(A) is amended by striking ``actors´´ and all that follows and inserting ``actors, production personnel, directors, and producers.´´.
(e) Effective Dates.—
(1) In General.—
Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the amendments made by this section shall apply to qualified film and television productions commencing after December 31, 2007.
(2) Deduction.—
The amendments made by subsection (c) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 503. Exemption From Excise Tax For Certain Wooden Arrows Designed For Use By Children.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Paragraph (2) of section 4161(b) is amended by redesignating subparagraph (B) as subparagraph (C) and by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following new subparagraph:
``(B) Exemption for certain wooden arrow shafts.—
``Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to any shaft consisting of all natural wood with no laminations or artificial means of enhancing the spine of such shaft (whether sold separately or incorporated as part of a finished or unfinished product) of a type used in the manufacture of any arrow which after its assembly—
``(i) measures \5/16\ of an inch or less in diameter, and
``(ii) is not suitable for use with a bow described in paragraph (1)(A).´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendments made by this section shall apply to shafts first sold after the date of enactment of this Act.
Sec. 504. Income Averaging For Amounts Received In Connection With The Exxon Valdez Litigation.[edit]
(a) Income Averaging of Amounts Received From the Exxon Valdez Litigation.—
For purposes of section 1301 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986—
(1) any qualified taxpayer who receives any qualified settlement income in any taxable year shall be treated as engaged in a fishing business (determined without regard to the commercial nature of the business), and
(2) such qualified settlement income shall be treated as income attributable to such a fishing business for such taxable year.
(b) Contributions of Amounts Received to Retirement Accounts.—
(1) In General.—
Any qualified taxpayer who receives qualified settlement income during the taxable year may, at any time before the end of the taxable year in which such income was received, make one or more contributions to an eligible retirement plan of which such qualified taxpayer is a beneficiary in an aggregate amount not to exceed the lesser of—
(A) $100,000 (reduced by the amount of qualified settlement income contributed to an eligible retirement plan in prior taxable years pursuant to this subsection), or
(B) the amount of qualified settlement income received by the individual during the taxable year.
(2) Time when contributions deemed made.—
For purposes of paragraph (1), a qualified taxpayer shall be deemed to have made a contribution to an eligible retirement plan on the last day of the taxable year in which such income is received if the contribution is made on account of such taxable year and is made not later than the time prescribed by law for filing the return for such taxable year (not including extensions thereof).
(3) Treatment of contributions to eligible retirement plans.—
For purposes of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, if a contribution is made pursuant to paragraph (1) with respect to qualified settlement income, then—
(A) except as provided in paragraph (4)—
(i) to the extent of such contribution, the qualified settlement income shall not be included in taxable income, and
(ii) for purposes of section 72 of such Code, such contribution shall not be considered to be investment in the contract,
(B) the qualified taxpayer shall, to the extent of the amount of the contribution, be treated—
(i) as having received the qualified settlement income—
(I) in the case of a contribution to an individual retirement plan (as defined under section 7701(a)(37) of such Code), in a distribution described in section 408(d)(3) of such Code, and
(II) in the case of any other eligible retirement plan, in an eligible rollover distribution (as defined under section 402(f)(2) of such Code), and
(ii) as having transferred the amount to the eligible retirement plan in a direct trustee to trustee transfer within 60 days of the distribution,
(C) section 408(d)(3)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall not apply with respect to amounts treated as a rollover under this paragraph, and
(D) section 408A(c)(3)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall not apply with respect to amounts contributed to a Roth IRA (as defined under section 408A(b) of such Code) or a designated Roth contribution to an applicable retirement plan (within the meaning of section 402A of such Code) under this paragraph.
(4) Special rule for roth iras and roth 401(k)s.—
For purposes of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, if a contribution is made pursuant to paragraph (1) with respect to qualified settlement income to a Roth IRA (as defined under section 408A(b) of such Code) or as a designated Roth contribution to an applicable retirement plan (within the meaning of section 402A of such Code), then—
(A) the qualified settlement income shall be includible in taxable income, and
(B) for purposes of section 72 of such Code, such contribution shall be considered to be investment in the contract.
(5) Eligible retirement plan.—
For purpose of this subsection, the term ``eligible retirement plan´´ has the meaning given such term under section 402(c)(8)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
(c) Treatment of Qualified Settlement Income Under Employment Taxes.—
(1) SECA.—
For purposes of chapter 2 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and section 211 of the Social Security Act, no portion of qualified settlement income received by a qualified taxpayer shall be treated as self-employment income.
(2) FICA.—
For purposes of chapter 21 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and section 209 of the Social Security Act, no portion of qualified settlement income received by a qualified taxpayer shall be treated as wages.
(d) Qualified Taxpayer.—
For purposes of this section, the term ``qualified taxpayer´´ means—
(1) any individual who is a plaintiff in the civil action In re Exxon Valdez, No. 89-095-CV (HRH) (Consolidated) (D. Alaska); or
(2) any individual who is a beneficiary of the estate of such a plaintiff who—
(A) acquired the right to receive qualified settlement income from that plaintiff; and
(B) was the spouse or an immediate relative of that plaintiff.
(e) Qualified Settlement Income.—
For purposes of this section, the term ``qualified settlement income´´ means any interest and punitive damage awards which are—
(1) otherwise includible in taxable income, and
(2) received (whether as lump sums or periodic payments) in connection with the civil action In re Exxon Valdez, No. 89-095-CV (HRH) (Consolidated) (D. Alaska) (whether pre- or post-judgment and whether related to a settlement or judgment).
Sec. 505. Certain Farming Business Machinery And Equipment Treated As 5-year Property.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Section 168(e)(3)(B) (defining 5-year property) is amended by striking ``and´´ at the end of clause (v), by striking the period at the end of clause (vi)(III) and inserting ``, and´´, and by inserting after clause (vi) the following new clause:
``(vii) any machinery or equipment (other than any grain bin, cotton ginning asset, fence, or other land improvement) which is used in a farming business (as defined in section 263A(e)(4)), the original use of which commences with the taxpayer after December 31, 2008, and which is placed in service before January 1, 2010.´´.
(b) Alternative System.—
The table contained in section 168(g)(3)(B) (relating to special rule for certain property assigned to classes) is amended by inserting after the item relating to subparagraph (B)(iii) the following:
``(B)(vii)................................    10´´.
(c) Effective Date.—
The amendments made by this section shall apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2008.
Sec. 506. Modification Of Penalty On Understatement Of Taxpayer's Liability By Tax Return Preparer.[edit]
(a) In General.—
Subsection (a) of section 6694 is amended to read as follows:
``(a) Understatement Due to Unreasonable Positions.—
``(1) In general.—If a tax return preparer—
``(A) prepares any return or claim of refund with respect to which any part of an understatement of liability is due to a position described in paragraph (2), and
``(B) knew (or reasonably should have known) of the position,
``such tax return preparer shall pay a penalty with respect to each such return or claim in an amount equal to the greater of $1,000 or 50 percent of the income derived (or to be derived) by the tax return preparer with respect to the return or claim.
``(2) Unreasonable position.—
``(A) In general.—Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, a position is described in this paragraph unless there is or was substantial authority for the position.
``(B) Disclosed positions.—If the position was disclosed as provided in section 6662(d)(2)(B)(ii)(I) and is not a position to which subparagraph (C) applies, the position is described in this paragraph unless there is a reasonable basis for the position.
``(C) Tax shelters and reportable transactions.—If the position is with respect to a tax shelter (as defined in section 6662(d)(2)(C)(ii)) or a reportable transaction to which section 6662A applies, the position is described in this paragraph unless it is reasonable to believe that the position would more likely than not be sustained on its merits.
``(3) Reasonable cause exception.—No penalty shall be imposed under this subsection if it is shown that there is reasonable cause for the understatement and the tax return preparer acted in good faith.´´.
(b) Effective Date.—
The amendment made by this section shall apply—
(1) in the case of a position other than a position described in subparagraph (C) of section 6694(a)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as amended by this section), to returns prepared after May 25, 2007, and
(2) in the case of a position described in such subparagraph (C), to returns prepared for taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Subtitle B—Paul Wellstone and Pete Domenici Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008[edit]
Sec. 511. Short Title.[edit]
This subtitle may be cited as the ``Paul Wellstone and Pete Domenici Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008´´.
Sec. 512. Mental Health Parity.[edit]
(a) Amendments to ERISA—
Section 712 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1185a) is amended—
(1) in subsection (a), by adding at the end the following:
`(3) FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS AND TREATMENT LIMITATIONS.—
`(A) IN GENERAL.— In the case of a group health plan (or health insurance coverage offered in connection with such a plan) that provides both medical and surgical benefits and mental health or substance use disorder benefits, such plan or coverage shall ensure that—
`(i) the financial requirements applicable to such mental health or substance use disorder benefits are no more restrictive than the predominant financial requirements applied to substantially all medical and surgical benefits covered by the plan (or coverage), and there are no separate cost sharing requirements that are applicable only with respect to mental health or substance use disorder benefits; and
`(ii) the treatment limitations applicable to such mental health or substance use disorder benefits are no more restrictive than the predominant treatment limitations applied to substantially all medical and surgical benefits covered by the plan (or coverage) and there are no separate treatment limitations that are applicable only with respect to mental health or substance use disorder benefits.
`(B) DEFINITIONS- In this paragraph:
`(i) FINANCIAL REQUIREMENT.— The term `financial requirement' includes deductibles, copayments, coinsurance, and out-of-pocket expenses, but excludes an aggregate lifetime limit and an annual limit subject to paragraphs (1) and (2),
`(ii) PREDOMINANT.— A financial requirement or treatment limit is considered to be predominant if it is the most common or frequent of such type of limit or requirement.
`(iii) TREATMENT LIMITATION.— The term `treatment limitation' includes limits on the frequency of treatment, number of visits, days of coverage, or other similar limits on the scope or duration of treatment.
`(4) AVAILABILITY OF PLAN INFORMATION.— The criteria for medical necessity determinations made under the plan with respect to mental health or substance use disorder benefits (or the health insurance coverage offered in connection with the plan with respect to such benefits) shall be made available by the plan administrator (or the health insurance issuer offering such coverage) in accordance with regulations to any current or potential participant, beneficiary, or contracting provider upon request. The reason for any denial under the plan (or coverage) of reimbursement or payment for services with respect to mental health or substance use disorder benefits in the case of any participant or beneficiary shall, on request or as otherwise required, be made available by the plan administrator (or the health insurance issuer offering such coverage) to the participant or beneficiary in accordance with regulations.
`(5) OUT-OF-NETWORK PROVIDERS.— In the case of a plan or coverage that provides both medical and surgical benefits and mental health or substance use disorder benefits, if the plan or coverage provides coverage for medical or surgical benefits provided by out-of-network providers, the plan or coverage shall provide coverage for mental health or substance use disorder benefits provided by out-of-network providers in a manner that is consistent with the requirements of this section.';
(2) in subsection (b), by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows:
`(2) in the case of a group health plan (or health insurance coverage offered in connection with such a plan) that provides mental health or substance use disorder benefits, as affecting the terms and conditions of the plan or coverage relating to such benefits under the plan or coverage, except as provided in subsection (a).';
(3) in subsection (c)—
(A) in paragraph (1)(B)—
(i) by inserting `(or 1 in the case of an employer residing in a State that permits small groups to include a single individual)' after `at least 2' the first place that such appears; and
(ii) by striking `and who employs at least 2 employees on the first day of the plan year'; and
(B) by striking paragraph (2) and inserting the following:
`(2) COST EXEMPTION.—
`(A) IN GENERAL.— With respect to a group health plan (or health insurance coverage offered in connection with such a plan), if the application of this section to such plan (or coverage) results in an increase for the plan year involved of the actual total costs of coverage with respect to medical and surgical benefits and mental health and substance use disorder benefits under the plan (as determined and certified under subparagraph (C)) by an amount that exceeds the applicable percentage described in subparagraph (B) of the actual total plan costs, the provisions of this section shall not apply to such plan (or coverage) during the following plan year, and such exemption shall apply to the plan (or coverage) for 1 plan year. An employer may elect to continue to apply mental health and substance use disorder parity pursuant to this section with respect to the group health plan (or coverage) involved regardless of any increase in total costs.
`(B) APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE.— With respect to a plan (or coverage), the applicable percentage described in this subparagraph shall be—
`(i) 2 percent in the case of the first plan year in which this section is applied; and
`(ii) 1 percent in the case of each subsequent plan year.
`(C) DETERMINATIONS BY ACTUARIES.— Determinations as to increases in actual costs under a plan (or coverage) for purposes of this section shall be made and certified by a qualified and licensed actuary who is a member in good standing of the American Academy of Actuaries. All such determinations shall be in a written report prepared by the actuary. The report, and all underlying documentation relied upon by the actuary, shall be maintained by the group health plan or health insurance issuer for a period of 6 years following the notification made under subparagraph (E).
`(D) 6-month DETERMINATIONS.— If a group health plan (or a health insurance issuer offering coverage in connection with a group health plan) seeks an exemption under this paragraph, determinations under subparagraph (A) shall be made after such plan (or coverage) has complied with this section for the first 6 months of the plan year involved.
`(E) NOTIFICATION.—
`(i) IN GENERAL.— A group health plan (or a health insurance issuer offering coverage in connection with a group health plan) that, based upon a certification described under subparagraph (C), qualifies for an exemption under this paragraph, and elects to implement the exemption, shall promptly notify the Secretary, the appropriate State agencies, and participants and beneficiaries in the plan of such election.
`(ii) REQUIREMENT.— A notification to the Secretary under clause (i) shall include—
`(I) a description of the number of covered lives under the plan (or coverage) involved at the time of the notification, and as applicable, at the time of any prior election of the cost-exemption under this paragraph by such plan (or coverage);
`(II) for both the plan year upon which a cost exemption is sought and the year prior, a description of the actual total costs of coverage with respect to medical and surgical benefits and mental health and substance use disorder benefits under the plan; and
`(III) for both the plan year upon which a cost exemption is sought and the year prior, the actual total costs of coverage with respect to mental health and substance use disorder benefits under the plan.
`(iii) CONFIDENTIALITY.— A notification to the Secretary under clause (i) shall be confidential. The Secretary shall make available, upon request and on not more than an annual basis, an anonymous itemization of such notifications, that includes—
`(I) a breakdown of States by the size and type of employers submitting such notification; and
`(II) a summary of the data received under clause (ii).
`(F) AUDITS BY APPROPRIATE AGENCIES.— To determine compliance with this paragraph, the Secretary may audit the books and records of a group health plan or health insurance issuer relating to an exemption, including any actuarial reports prepared pursuant to subparagraph (C), during the 6 year period following the notification of such exemption under subparagraph (E). A State agency receiving a notification under subparagraph (E) may also conduct such an audit with respect to an exemption covered by such notification.';
(4) in subsection (e), by striking paragraph (4) and inserting the following:
`(4) MENTAL HEALTH BENEFITS.— The term `mental health benefits' means benefits with respect to services for mental health conditions, as defined under the terms of the plan and in accordance with applicable Federal and State law.
`(5) SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER BENEFITS.— The term `substance use disorder benefits' means benefits with respect to services for substance use disorders, as defined under the terms of the plan and in accordance with applicable Federal and State law.';
(5) by striking subsection (f);
(6) by inserting after subsection (e) the following:
`(f) Secretary Report.— The Secretary shall, by January 1, 2012, and every two years thereafter, submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report on compliance of group health plans (and health insurance coverage offered in connection with such plans) with the requirements of this section. Such report shall include the results of any surveys or audits on compliance of group health plans (and health insurance coverage offered in connection with such plans) with such requirements and an analysis of the reasons for any failures to comply.
`(g) Notice and Assistance.— The Secretary, in cooperation with the Secretaries of Health and Human Services and Treasury, as appropriate, shall publish and widely disseminate guidance and information for group health plans, participants and beneficiaries, applicable State and local regulatory bodies, and the National Association of Insurance Commissioners concerning the requirements of this section and shall provide assistance concerning such requirements and the continued operation of applicable State law. Such guidance and information shall inform participants and beneficiaries of how they may obtain assistance under this section, including, where appropriate, assistance from State consumer and insurance agencies.';
(7) by striking `mental health benefits' and inserting `mental health and substance use disorder benefits' each place it appears in subsections (a)(1)(B)(i), (a)(1)(C), (a)(2)(B)(i), and (a)(2)(C); and
(8) by striking `mental health benefits' and inserting `mental health or substance use disorder benefits' each place it appears (other than in any provision amended by the previous paragraph).
(b) Amendments to Public Health Service Act.—
Section 2705 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 300gg-5) is amended—
(1) in subsection (a), by adding at the end the following:
`(3) FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS AND TREATMENT LIMITATIONS.—
`(A) IN GENERAL.— In the case of a group health plan (or health insurance coverage offered in connection with such a plan) that provides both medical and surgical benefits and mental health or substance use disorder benefits, such plan or coverage shall ensure that—
`(i) the financial requirements applicable to such mental health or substance use disorder benefits are no more restrictive than the predominant financial requirements applied to substantially all medical and surgical benefits covered by the plan (or coverage), and there are no separate cost sharing requirements that are applicable only with respect to mental health or substance use disorder benefits; and
`(ii) the treatment limitations applicable to such mental health or substance use disorder benefits are no more restrictive than the predominant treatment limitations applied to substantially all medical and surgical benefits covered by the plan (or coverage) and there are no separate treatment limitations that are applicable only with respect to mental health or substance use disorder benefits.
`(B) DEFINITIONS.— In this paragraph:
`(i) FINANCIAL REQUIREMENT.— The term `financial requirement' includes deductibles, copayments, coinsurance, and out-of-pocket expenses, but excludes an aggregate lifetime limit and an annual limit subject to paragraphs (1) and (2).
`(ii) PREDOMINANT.— A financial requirement or treatment limit is considered to be predominant if it is the most common or frequent of such type of limit or requirement.
`(iii) TREATMENT LIMITATION.— The term `treatment limitation' includes limits on the frequency of treatment, number of visits, days of coverage, or other similar limits on the scope or duration of treatment.
`(4) AVAILABILITY OF PLAN INFORMATION.— The criteria for medical necessity determinations made under the plan with respect to mental health or substance use disorder benefits (or the health insurance coverage offered in connection with the plan with respect to such benefits) shall be made available by the plan administrator (or the health insurance issuer offering such coverage) in accordance with regulations to any current or potential participant, beneficiary, or contracting provider upon request. The reason for any denial under the plan (or coverage) of reimbursement or payment for services with respect to mental health or substance use disorder benefits in the case of any participant or beneficiary shall, on request or as otherwise required, be made available by the plan administrator (or the health insurance issuer offering such coverage) to the participant or beneficiary in accordance with regulations.
`(5) OUT-OF-NETWORK PROVIDERS.— In the case of a plan or coverage that provides both medical and surgical benefits and mental health or substance use disorder benefits, if the plan or coverage provides coverage for medical or surgical benefits provided by out-of-network providers, the plan or coverage shall provide coverage for mental health or substance use disorder benefits provided by out-of-network providers in a manner that is consistent with the requirements of this section.';
(2) in subsection (b), by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows:
`(2) in the case of a group health plan (or health insurance coverage offered in connection with such a plan) that provides mental health or substance use disorder benefits, as affecting the terms and conditions of the plan or coverage relating to such benefits under the plan or coverage, except as provided in subsection (a).';
(3) in subsection (c)—
(A) in paragraph (1), by inserting before the period the following: `(as defined in section 2791(e)(4), except that for purposes of this paragraph such term shall include employers with 1 employee in the case of an employer residing in a State that permits small groups to include a single individual)'; and
(B) by striking paragraph (2) and inserting the following:
`(2) COST EXEMPTION.—
`(A) IN GENERAL.— With respect to a group health plan (or health insurance coverage offered in connection with such a plan), if the application of this section to such plan (or coverage) results in an increase for the plan year involved of the actual total costs of coverage with respect to medical and surgical benefits and mental health and substance use disorder benefits under the plan (as determined and certified under subparagraph (C)) by an amount that exceeds the applicable percentage described in subparagraph (B) of the actual total plan costs, the provisions of this section shall not apply to such plan (or coverage) during the following plan year, and such exemption shall apply to the plan (or coverage) for 1 plan year. An employer may elect to continue to apply mental health and substance use disorder parity pursuant to this section with respect to the group health plan (or coverage) involved regardless of any increase in total costs.
`(B) APPLICABLE PERCENTAGE.— With respect to a plan (or coverage), the applicable percentage described in this subparagraph shall be—
`(i) 2 percent in the case of the first plan year in which this section is applied; and
`(ii) 1 percent in the case of each subsequent plan year.
`(C) DETERMINATIONS BY ACTUARIES.— Determinations as to increases in actual costs under a plan (or coverage) for purposes of this section shall be made and certified by a qualified and licensed actuary who is a member in good standing of the American Academy of Actuaries. All such determinations shall be in a written report prepared by the actuary. The report, and all underlying documentation relied upon by the actuary, shall be maintained by the group health plan or health insurance issuer for a period of 6 years following the notification made under subparagraph (E).
`(D) 6-month DETERMINATIONS.— If a group health plan (or a health insurance issuer offering coverage in connection with a group health plan) seeks an exemption under this paragraph, determinations under subparagraph (A) shall be made after such plan (or coverage) has complied with this section for the first 6 months of the plan year involved.
`(E) NOTIFICATION.—
`(i) IN GENERAL.— A group health plan (or a health insurance issuer offering coverage in connection with a group health plan) that, based upon a certification described under subparagraph (C), qualifies for an exemption under this paragraph, and elects to implement the exemption, shall promptly notify the Secretary, the appropriate State agencies, and participants and beneficiaries in the plan of such election.
`(ii) REQUIREMENT.— A notification to the Secretary under clause (i) shall include—
`(I) a description of the number of covered lives under the plan (or coverage) involved at the time of the notification, and as applicable, at the time of any prior election of the cost-exemption under this paragraph by such plan (or coverage);
`(II) for both the plan year upon which a cost exemption is sought and the year prior, a description of the actual total costs of coverage with respect to medical and surgical benefits and mental health and substance use disorder benefits under the plan; and
`(III) for both the plan year upon which a cost exemption is sought and the year prior, the actual total costs of coverage with respect to mental health and substance use disorder benefits under the plan.
`(iii) CONFIDENTIALITY.— A notification to the Secretary under clause (i) shall be confidential. The Secretary shall make available, upon request and on not more than an annual basis, an anonymous itemization of such notifications, that includes—
`(I) a breakdown of States by the size and type of employers submitting such notification; and
`(II) a summary of the data received under clause (ii).
`(F) AUDITS BY APPROPRIATE AGENCIES.— To determine compliance with this paragraph, the Secretary may audit the books and records of a group health plan relating to an exemption, including any actuarial reports prepared pursuant to subparagraph (C), during the 6 year period following the notification of such exemption under subparagraph (E). A State agency receiving a notification under subparagraph (E) may also conduct such an audit with respect to an exemption covered by such notification.';
(4) in subsection (e), by striking paragraph (4) and inserting the following:
`(4) MENTAL HEALTH BENEFITS.— The term `mental health benefits' means benefits with respect to services for mental health conditions, as defined under the terms of the plan and in accordance with applicable Federal and State law.
`(5) SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER BENEFITS.— The term `substance use disorder benefits' means benefits with respect to services for substance use disorders, as defined under the terms of the plan and in accordance with applicable Federal and State law.';
(5) by striking subsection (f);
(6) by striking `mental health benefits' and inserting `mental health and substance use disorder benefits' each place it appears in subsections (a)(1)(B)(i), (a)(1)(C), (a)(2)(B)(i), and (a)(2)(C); and
(7) by striking `mental health benefits' and inserting `mental health or substance use disorder benefits' each place it appears (other than in any provision amended by the previous paragraph).
(d) Regulations.—
Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretaries of Labor, Health and Human Services, and the Treasury shall issue regulations to carry out the amendments made by subsections (a), (b), and (c), respectively.
(e) Effective Date.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—
The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to group health plans for plan years beginning after the date that is 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, regardless of whether regulations have been issued to carry out such amendments by such effective date, except that the amendments made by subsections (a)(5), (b)(5), and (c)(5), relating to striking of certain sunset provisions, shall take effect on January 1, 2009.
(2) SPECIAL RULE FOR COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS.—
In the case of a group health plan maintained pursuant to one or more collective bargaining agreements between employee representatives and one or more employers ratified before the date of the enactment of this Act, the amendments made by this section shall not apply to plan years beginning before the later of—
(A) the date on which the last of the collective bargaining agreements relating to the plan terminates (determined without regard to any extension thereof agreed to after the date of the enactment of this Act), or
(B) January 1, 2009.
For purposes of subparagraph (A), any plan amendment made pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement relating to the plan which amends the plan solely to conform to any requirement added by this section shall not be treated as a termination of such collective bargaining agreement.
(f) Assuring Coordination.—
The Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Secretary of Labor, and the Secretary of the Treasury may ensure, through the execution or revision of an interagency memorandum of understanding among such Secretaries, that—
(1) regulations, rulings, and interpretations issued by such Secretaries relating to the same matter over which two or more such Secretaries have responsibility under this section (and the amendments made by this section) are administered so as to have the same effect at all times; and
(2) coordination of policies relating to enforcing the same requirements through such Secretaries in order to have a coordinated enforcement strategy that avoids duplication of enforcement efforts and assigns priorities in enforcement.
(g) Conforming Clerical Amendments—
(1) ERISA HEADING—
(A) IN GENERAL—
The heading of section 712 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 712. PARITY IN MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER BENEFITS.'.
(B) CLERICAL AMENDMENT—
The table of contents in section 1 of such Act is amended by striking the item relating to section 712 and inserting the following new item:
`Sec. 712. Parity in mental health and substance use disorder benefits.'.
(2) PHSA HEADING—
The heading of section 2705 of the Public Health Service Act is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 2705. PARITY IN MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER BENEFITS.'.
(3) IRC HEADING—
(A) IN GENERAL—
The heading of section 9812 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended to read as follows:
`SEC. 9812. PARITY IN MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER BENEFITS.'.
(B) CLERICAL AMENDMENT—
The table of sections for subchapter B of chapter 100 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 9812 and inserting the following new item:
`Sec. 9812. Parity in mental health and substance use disorder benefits.'.
(h) GAO Study on Coverage and Exclusion of Mental Health and Substance Use Disorder Diagnoses-
(1) IN GENERAL—
The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct a study that analyzes the specific rates, patterns, and trends in coverage and exclusion of specific mental health and substance use disorder diagnoses by health plans and health insurance. The study shall include an analysis of—
(A) specific coverage rates for all mental health conditions and substance use disorders;
(B) which diagnoses are most commonly covered or excluded;
(C) whether implementation of this Act has affected trends in coverage or exclusion of such diagnoses; and
(D) the impact of covering or excluding specific diagnoses on participants' and enrollees' health, their health care coverage, and the costs of delivering health care.
(2) REPORTS—
Not later than 3 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, and 2 years after the date of submission the first report under this paragraph, the Comptroller General shall submit to Congress a report on the results of the study conducted under paragraph (1).
TITLE VI—OTHER PROVISIONS[edit]
Sec. 601. Secure Rural Schools And Community Self-determination Program.[edit]
(a) Reauthorization of the Secure Rural Schools and Community Self-Determination Act of 2000—
The Secure Rural Schools and Community Self-Determination Act of 2000 (16 U.S.C. 500 note; Public Law 106-393) is amended by striking sections 1 through 403 and inserting the following:
`SEC. 1. SHORT TITLE.
`This Act may be cited as the `Secure Rural Schools and Community Self-Determination Act of 2000'.
`SEC. 2. PURPOSES.
`The purposes of this Act are—
`(1) to stabilize and transition payments to counties to provide funding for schools and roads that supplements other available funds;
`(2) to make additional investments in, and create additional employment opportunities through, projects that—
`(A)(i) improve the maintenance of existing infrastructure;
`(ii) implement stewardship objectives that enhance forest ecosystems; and
`(iii) restore and improve land health and water quality;
`(B) enjoy broad-based support; and
`(C) have objectives that may include—
`(i) road, trail, and infrastructure maintenance or obliteration;
`(ii) soil productivity improvement;
`(iii) improvements in forest ecosystem health;
`(iv) watershed restoration and maintenance;
`(v) the restoration, maintenance, and improvement of wildlife and fish habitat;
`(vi) the control of noxious and exotic weeds; and
`(vii) the reestablishment of native species; and
`(3) to improve cooperative relationships among—
`(A) the people that use and care for Federal land; and
`(B) the agencies that manage the Federal land.
`SEC. 3. DEFINITIONS.
`In this Act:
`(1) ADJUSTED SHARE- The term `adjusted share' means the number equal to the quotient obtained by dividing—
`(A) the number equal to the quotient obtained by dividing—
`(i) the base share for the eligible county; by
`(ii) the income adjustment for the eligible county; by
`(B) the number equal to the sum of the quotients obtained under subparagraph (A) and paragraph (8)(A) for all eligible counties.
`(2) BASE SHARE- The term `base share' means the number equal to the average of—
`(A) the quotient obtained by dividing—
`(i) the number of acres of Federal land described in paragraph (7)(A) in each eligible county; by
`(ii) the total number acres of Federal land in all eligible counties in all eligible States; and
`(B) the quotient obtained by dividing—
`(i) the amount equal to the average of the 3 highest 25-percent payments and safety net payments made to each eligible State for each eligible county during the eligibility period; by
`(ii) the amount equal to the sum of the amounts calculated under clause (i) and paragraph (9)(B)(i) for all eligible counties in all eligible States during the eligibility period.
`(3) COUNTY PAYMENT- The term `county payment' means the payment for an eligible county calculated under section 101(b).
`(4) ELIGIBLE COUNTY- The term `eligible county' means any county that—
`(A) contains Federal land (as defined in paragraph (7)); and
`(B) elects to receive a share of the State payment or the county payment under section 102(b).
`(5) ELIGIBILITY PERIOD- The term `eligibility period' means fiscal year 1986 through fiscal year 1999.
`(6) ELIGIBLE STATE- The term `eligible State' means a State or territory of the United States that received a 25-percent payment for 1 or more fiscal years of the eligibility period.
`(7) FEDERAL LAND- The term `Federal land' means—
`(A) land within the National Forest System, as defined in section 11(a) of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1609(a)) exclusive of the National Grasslands and land utilization projects designated as National Grasslands administered pursuant to the Act of July 22, 1937 (7 U.S.C. 1010-1012); and
`(B) such portions of the revested Oregon and California Railroad and reconveyed Coos Bay Wagon Road grant land as are or may hereafter come under the jurisdiction of the Department of the Interior, which have heretofore or may hereafter be classified as timberlands, and power-site land valuable for timber, that shall be managed, except as provided in the former section 3 of the Act of August 28, 1937 (50 Stat. 875; 43 U.S.C. 1181c), for permanent forest production.
`(8) 50-percent ADJUSTED SHARE- The term `50-percent adjusted share' means the number equal to the quotient obtained by dividing—
`(A) the number equal to the quotient obtained by dividing—
`(i) the 50-percent base share for the eligible county; by
`(ii) the income adjustment for the eligible county; by
`(B) the number equal to the sum of the quotients obtained under subparagraph (A) and paragraph (1)(A) for all eligible counties.
`(9) 50-percent BASE SHARE- The term `50-percent base share' means the number equal to the average of—
`(A) the quotient obtained by dividing—
`(i) the number of acres of Federal land described in paragraph (7)(B) in each eligible county; by
`(ii) the total number acres of Federal land in all eligible counties in all eligible States; and
`(B) the quotient obtained by dividing—
`(i) the amount equal to the average of the 3 highest 50-percent payments made to each eligible county during the eligibility period; by
`(ii) the amount equal to the sum of the amounts calculated under clause (i) and paragraph (2)(B)(i) for all eligible counties in all eligible States during the eligibility period.
`(10) 50-percent PAYMENT- The term `50-percent payment' means the payment that is the sum of the 50-percent share otherwise paid to a county pursuant to title II of the Act of August 28, 1937 (chapter 876; 50 Stat. 875; 43 U.S.C. 1181f), and the payment made to a county pursuant to the Act of May 24, 1939 (chapter 144; 53 Stat. 753; 43 U.S.C. 1181f-1 et seq.).
`(11) FULL FUNDING AMOUNT- The term `full funding amount' means—
`(A) $500,000,000 for fiscal year 2008; and
`(B) for fiscal year 2009 and each fiscal year thereafter, the amount that is equal to 90 percent of the full funding amount for the preceding fiscal year.
`(12) INCOME ADJUSTMENT- The term `income adjustment' means the square of the quotient obtained by dividing—
`(A) the per capita personal income for each eligible county; by
`(B) the median per capita personal income of all eligible counties.
`(13) PER CAPITA PERSONAL INCOME- The term `per capita personal income' means the most recent per capita personal income data, as determined by the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
`(14) SAFETY NET PAYMENTS- The term `safety net payments' means the special payment amounts paid to States and counties required by section 13982 or 13983 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 (Public Law 103-66; 16 U.S.C. 500 note; 43 U.S.C. 1181f note).
`(15) SECRETARY CONCERNED- The term `Secretary concerned' means—
`(A) the Secretary of Agriculture or the designee of the Secretary of Agriculture with respect to the Federal land described in paragraph (7)(A); and
`(B) the Secretary of the Interior or the designee of the Secretary of the Interior with respect to the Federal land described in paragraph (7)(B).
`(16) STATE PAYMENT- The term `State payment' means the payment for an eligible State calculated under section 101(a).
`(17) 25-percent PAYMENT- The term `25-percent payment' means the payment to States required by the sixth paragraph under the heading of `FOREST SERVICE' in the Act of May 23, 1908 (35 Stat. 260; 16 U.S.C. 500), and section 13 of the Act of March 1, 1911 (36 Stat. 963; 16 U.S.C. 500).
`TITLE I—SECURE PAYMENTS FOR STATES AND COUNTIES CONTAINING FEDERAL LAND
`SEC. 101. SECURE PAYMENTS FOR STATES CONTAINING FEDERAL LAND.
`(a) State Payment- For each of fiscal years 2008 through 2011, the Secretary of Agriculture shall calculate for each eligible State an amount equal to the sum of the products obtained by multiplying—
`(1) the adjusted share for each eligible county within the eligible State; by
`(2) the full funding amount for the fiscal year.
`(b) County Payment- For each of fiscal years 2008 through 2011, the Secretary of the Interior shall calculate for each eligible county that received a 50-percent payment during the eligibility period an amount equal to the product obtained by multiplying—
`(1) the 50-percent adjusted share for the eligible county; by
`(2) the full funding amount for the fiscal year.
`SEC. 102. PAYMENTS TO STATES AND COUNTIES.
`(a) Payment Amounts- Except as provided in section 103, the Secretary of the Treasury shall pay to—
`(1) a State or territory of the United States an amount equal to the sum of the amounts elected under subsection (b) by each county within the State or territory for—
`(A) if the county is eligible for the 25-percent payment, the share of the 25-percent payment; or
`(B) the share of the State payment of the eligible county; and
`(2) a county an amount equal to the amount elected under subsection (b) by each county for—
`(A) if the county is eligible for the 50-percent payment, the 50-percent payment; or
`(B) the county payment for the eligible county.
`(b) Election To Receive Payment Amount-
`(1) ELECTION; SUBMISSION OF RESULTS-
`(A) IN GENERAL- The election to receive a share of the State payment, the county payment, a share of the State payment and the county payment, a share of the 25-percent payment, the 50-percent payment, or a share of the 25-percent payment and the 50-percent payment, as applicable, shall be made at the discretion of each affected county by August 1, 2008 (or as soon thereafter as the Secretary concerned determines is practicable), and August 1 of each second fiscal year thereafter, in accordance with paragraph (2), and transmitted to the Secretary concerned by the Governor of each eligible State.
`(B) FAILURE TO TRANSMIT- If an election for an affected county is not transmitted to the Secretary concerned by the date specified under subparagraph (A), the affected county shall be considered to have elected to receive a share of the State payment, the county payment, or a share of the State payment and the county payment, as applicable.
`(2) DURATION OF ELECTION-
`(A) IN GENERAL- A county election to receive a share of the 25-percent payment or 50-percent payment, as applicable, shall be effective for 2 fiscal years.
`(B) FULL FUNDING AMOUNT- If a county elects to receive a share of the State payment or the county payment, the election shall be effective for all subsequent fiscal years through fiscal year 2011.
`(3) SOURCE OF PAYMENT AMOUNTS- The payment to an eligible State or eligible county under this section for a fiscal year shall be derived from—
`(A) any amounts that are appropriated to carry out this Act;
`(B) any revenues, fees, penalties, or miscellaneous receipts, exclusive of deposits to any relevant trust fund, special account, or permanent operating funds, received by the Federal Government from activities by the Bureau of Land Management or the Forest Service on the applicable Federal land; and
`(C) to the extent of any shortfall, out of any amounts in the Treasury of the United States not otherwise appropriated.
`(c) Distribution and Expenditure of Payments-
`(1) DISTRIBUTION METHOD- A State that receives a payment under subsection (a) for Federal land described in section 3(7)(A) shall distribute the appropriate payment amount among the appropriate counties in the State in accordance with—
`(A) the Act of May 23, 1908 (16 U.S.C. 500); and
`(B) section 13 of the Act of March 1, 1911 (36 Stat. 963; 16 U.S.C. 500).
`(2) EXPENDITURE PURPOSES- Subject to subsection (d), payments received by a State under subsection (a) and distributed to counties in accordance with paragraph (1) shall be expended as required by the laws referred to in paragraph (1).
`(d) Expenditure Rules for Eligible Counties-
`(1) ALLOCATIONS-
`(A) USE OF PORTION IN SAME MANNER AS 25-PERCENT PAYMENT OR 50-PERCENT PAYMENT, AS APPLICABLE- Except as provided in paragraph (3)(B), if an eligible county elects to receive its share of the State payment or the county payment, not less than 80 percent, but not more than 85 percent, of the funds shall be expended in the same manner in which the 25-percent payments or 50-percent payment, as applicable, are required to be expended.
`(B) ELECTION AS TO USE OF BALANCE- Except as provided in subparagraph (C), an eligible county shall elect to do 1 or more of the following with the balance of any funds not expended pursuant to subparagraph (A):
`(i) Reserve any portion of the balance for projects in accordance with title II.
`(ii) Reserve not more than 7 percent of the total share for the eligible county of the State payment or the county payment for projects in accordance with title III.
`(iii) Return the portion of the balance not reserved under clauses (i) and (ii) to the Treasury of the United States.
`(C) COUNTIES WITH MODEST DISTRIBUTIONS- In the case of each eligible county to which more than $100,000, but less than $350,000, is distributed for any fiscal year pursuant to either or both of paragraphs (1)(B) and (2)(B) of subsection (a), the eligible county, with respect to the balance of any funds not expended pursuant to subparagraph (A) for that fiscal year, shall—
`(i) reserve any portion of the balance for—
`(I) carrying out projects under title II;
`(II) carrying out projects under title III; or
`(III) a combination of the purposes described in subclauses (I) and (II); or
`(ii) return the portion of the balance not reserved under clause (i) to the Treasury of the United States.
`(2) DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS-
`(A) IN GENERAL- Funds reserved by an eligible county under subparagraph (B)(i) or (C)(i) of paragraph (1) for carrying out projects under title II shall be deposited in a special account in the Treasury of the United States.
`(B) AVAILABILITY- Amounts deposited under subparagraph (A) shall—
`(i) be available for expenditure by the Secretary concerned, without further appropriation; and
`(ii) remain available until expended in accordance with title II.
`(3) ELECTION-
`(A) NOTIFICATION-
`(i) IN GENERAL- An eligible county shall notify the Secretary concerned of an election by the eligible county under this subsection not later than September 30, 2008 (or as soon thereafter as the Secretary concerned determines is practicable), and each September 30 thereafter for each succeeding fiscal year.
`(ii) FAILURE TO ELECT- Except as provided in subparagraph (B), if the eligible county fails to make an election by the date specified in clause (i), the eligible county shall—
`(I) be considered to have elected to expend 85 percent of the funds in accordance with paragraph (1)(A); and
`(II) return the balance to the Treasury of the United States.
`(B) COUNTIES WITH MINOR DISTRIBUTIONS- In the case of each eligible county to which less than $100,000 is distributed for any fiscal year pursuant to either or both of paragraphs (1)(B) and (2)(B) of subsection (a), the eligible county may elect to expend all the funds in the same manner in which the 25-percent payments or 50-percent payments, as applicable, are required to be expended.
`(e) Time for Payment- The payments required under this section for a fiscal year shall be made as soon as practicable after the end of that fiscal year.
`SEC. 103. TRANSITION PAYMENTS TO STATES.
`(a) Definitions- In this section:
`(1) ADJUSTED AMOUNT- The term `adjusted amount' means, with respect to a covered State—
`(A) for fiscal year 2008, 90 percent of—
`(i) the sum of the amounts paid for fiscal year 2006 under section 102(a)(2) (as in effect on September 29, 2006) for the eligible counties in the covered State that have elected under section 102(b) to receive a share of the State payment for fiscal year 2008; and
`(ii) the sum of the amounts paid for fiscal year 2006 under section 103(a)(2) (as in effect on September 29, 2006) for the eligible counties in the State of Oregon that have elected under section 102(b) to receive the county payment for fiscal year 2008;
`(B) for fiscal year 2009, 81 percent of—
`(i) the sum of the amounts paid for fiscal year 2006 under section 102(a)(2) (as in effect on September 29, 2006) for the eligible counties in the covered State that have elected under section 102(b) to receive a share of the State payment for fiscal year 2009; and
`(ii) the sum of the amounts paid for fiscal year 2006 under section 103(a)(2) (as in effect on September 29, 2006) for the eligible counties in the State of Oregon that have elected under section 102(b) to receive the county payment for fiscal year 2009; and
`(C) for fiscal year 2010, 73 percent of—
`(i) the sum of the amounts paid for fiscal year 2006 under section 102(a)(2) (as in effect on September 29, 2006) for the eligible counties in the covered State that have elected under section 102(b) to receive a share of the State payment for fiscal year 2010; and
`(ii) the sum of the amounts paid for fiscal year 2006 under section 103(a)(2) (as in effect on September 29, 2006) for the eligible counties in the State of Oregon that have elected under section 102(b) to receive the county payment for fiscal year 2010.
`(2) COVERED STATE- The term `covered State' means each of the States of California, Louisiana, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, and Washington.
`(b) Transition Payments- For each of fiscal years 2008 through 2010, in lieu of the payment amounts that otherwise would have been made under paragraphs (1)(B) and (2)(B) of section 102(a), the Secretary of the Treasury shall pay the adjusted amount to each covered State and the eligible counties within the covered State, as applicable.
`(c) Distribution of Adjusted Amount- Except as provided in subsection (d), it is the intent of Congress that the method of distributing the payments under subsection (b) among the counties in the covered States for each of fiscal years 2008 through 2010 be in the same proportion that the payments were distributed to the eligible counties in fiscal year 2006.
`(d) Distribution of Payments in California- The following payments shall be distributed among the eligible counties in the State of California in the same proportion that payments under section 102(a)(2) (as in effect on September 29, 2006) were distributed to the eligible counties for fiscal year 2006:
`(1) Payments to the State of California under subsection (b).
`(2) The shares of the eligible counties of the State payment for California under section 102 for fiscal year 2011.
`(e) Treatment of Payments- For purposes of this Act, any payment made under subsection (b) shall be considered to be a payment made under section 102(a).
`TITLE II—SPECIAL PROJECTS ON FEDERAL LAND
`SEC. 201. DEFINITIONS.
`In this title:
`(1) PARTICIPATING COUNTY- The term `participating county' means an eligible county that elects under section 102(d) to expend a portion of the Federal funds received under section 102 in accordance with this title.
`(2) PROJECT FUNDS- The term `project funds' means all funds an eligible county elects under section 102(d) to reserve for expenditure in accordance with this title.
`(3) RESOURCE ADVISORY COMMITTEE- The term `resource advisory committee' means—
`(A) an advisory committee established by the Secretary concerned under section 205; or
`(B) an advisory committee determined by the Secretary concerned to meet the requirements of section 205.
`(4) RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLAN- The term `resource management plan' means—
`(A) a land use plan prepared by the Bureau of Land Management for units of the Federal land described in section 3(7)(B) pursuant to section 202 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 U.S.C. 1712); or
`(B) a land and resource management plan prepared by the Forest Service for units of the National Forest System pursuant to section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 U.S.C. 1604).
`SEC. 202. GENERAL LIMITATION ON USE OF PROJECT FUNDS.
`(a) Limitation- Project funds shall be expended solely on projects that meet the requirements of this title.
`(b) Authorized Uses- Project funds may be used by the Secretary concerned for the purpose of entering into and implementing cooperative agreements with willing Federal agencies, State and local governments, private and nonprofit entities, and landowners for protection, restoration, and enhancement of fish and wildlife habitat, and other resource objectives consistent with the purposes of this Act on Federal land and on non-Federal land where projects would benefit the resources on Federal land.
`SEC. 203. SUBMISSION OF PROJECT PROPOSALS.
`(a) Submission of Project Proposals to Secretary Concerned-
`(1) PROJECTS FUNDED USING PROJECT FUNDS- Not later than September 30 for fiscal year 2008 (or as soon thereafter as the Secretary concerned determines is practicable), and each September 30 thereafter for each succeeding fiscal year through fiscal year 2011, each resource advisory committee shall submit to the Secretary concerned a description of any projects that the resource advisory committee proposes the Secretary undertake using any project funds reserved by eligible counties in the area in which the resource advisory committee has geographic jurisdiction.
`(2) PROJECTS FUNDED USING OTHER FUNDS- A resource advisory committee may submit to the Secretary concerned a description of any projects that the committee proposes the Secretary undertake using funds from State or local governments, or from the private sector, other than project funds and funds appropriated and otherwise available to do similar work.
`(3) JOINT PROJECTS- Participating counties or other persons may propose to pool project funds or other funds, described in paragraph (2), and jointly propose a project or group of projects to a resource advisory committee established under section 205.
`(b) Required Description of Projects- In submitting proposed projects to the Secretary concerned under subsection (a), a resource advisory committee shall include in the description of each proposed project the following information:
`(1) The purpose of the project and a description of how the project will meet the purposes of this title.
`(2) The anticipated duration of the project.
`(3) The anticipated cost of the project.
`(4) The proposed source of funding for the project, whether project funds or other funds.
`(5)(A) Expected outcomes, including how the project will meet or exceed desired ecological conditions, maintenance objectives, or stewardship objectives.
`(B) An estimate of the amount of any timber, forage, and other commodities and other economic activity, including jobs generated, if any, anticipated as part of the project.
`(6) A detailed monitoring plan, including funding needs and sources, that—
`(A) tracks and identifies the positive or negative impacts of the project, implementation, and provides for validation monitoring; and
`(B) includes an assessment of the following:
`(i) Whether or not the project met or exceeded desired ecological conditions; created local employment or training opportunities, including summer youth jobs programs such as the Youth Conservation Corps where appropriate.
`(ii) Whether the project improved the use of, or added value to, any products removed from land consistent with the purposes of this title.
`(7) An assessment that the project is to be in the public interest.
`(c) Authorized Projects- Projects proposed under subsection (a) shall be consistent with section 2.
`SEC. 204. EVALUATION AND APPROVAL OF PROJECTS BY SECRETARY CONCERNED.
`(a) Conditions for Approval of Proposed Project- The Secretary concerned may make a decision to approve a project submitted by a resource advisory committee under section 203 only if the proposed project satisfies each of the following conditions:
`(1) The project complies with all applicable Federal laws (including regulations).
`(2) The project is consistent with the applicable resource management plan and with any watershed or subsequent plan developed pursuant to the resource management plan and approved by the Secretary concerned.
`(3) The project has been approved by the resource advisory committee in accordance with section 205, including the procedures issued under subsection (e) of that section.
`(4) A project description has been submitted by the resource advisory committee to the Secretary concerned in accordance with section 203.
`(5) The project will improve the maintenance of existing infrastructure, implement stewardship objectives that enhance forest ecosystems, and restore and improve land health and water quality.
`(b) Environmental Reviews-
`(1) REQUEST FOR PAYMENT BY COUNTY- The Secretary concerned may request the resource advisory committee submitting a proposed project to agree to the use of project funds to pay for any environmental review, consultation, or compliance with applicable environmental laws required in connection with the project.
`(2) CONDUCT OF ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW- If a payment is requested under paragraph (1) and the resource advisory committee agrees to the expenditure of funds for this purpose, the Secretary concerned shall conduct environmental review, consultation, or other compliance responsibilities in accordance with Federal laws (including regulations).
`(3) EFFECT OF REFUSAL TO PAY-
`(A) IN GENERAL- If a resource advisory committee does not agree to the expenditure of funds under paragraph (1), the project shall be deemed withdrawn from further consideration by the Secretary concerned pursuant to this title.
`(B) EFFECT OF WITHDRAWAL- A withdrawal under subparagraph (A) shall be deemed to be a rejection of the project for purposes of section 207(c).
`(c) Decisions of Secretary Concerned-
`(1) REJECTION OF PROJECTS-
`(A) IN GENERAL- A decision by the Secretary concerned to reject a proposed project shall be at the sole discretion of the Secretary concerned.
`(B) NO ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL OR JUDICIAL REVIEW- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a decision by the Secretary concerned to reject a proposed project shall not be subject to administrative appeal or judicial review.
`(C) NOTICE OF REJECTION- Not later than 30 days after the date on which the Secretary concerned makes the rejection decision, the Secretary concerned shall notify in writing the resource advisory committee that submitted the proposed project of the rejection and the reasons for rejection.
`(2) NOTICE OF PROJECT APPROVAL- The Secretary concerned shall publish in the Federal Register notice of each project approved under subsection (a) if the notice would be required had the project originated with the Secretary.
`(d) Source and Conduct of Project- Once the Secretary concerned accepts a project for review under section 203, the acceptance shall be deemed a Federal action for all purposes.
`(e) Implementation of Approved Projects-
`(1) COOPERATION- Notwithstanding chapter 63 of title 31, United States Code, using project funds the Secretary concerned may enter into contracts, grants, and cooperative agreements with States and local governments, private and nonprofit entities, and landowners and other persons to assist the Secretary in carrying out an approved project.
`(2) BEST VALUE CONTRACTING-
`(A) IN GENERAL- For any project involving a contract authorized by paragraph (1) the Secretary concerned may elect a source for performance of the contract on a best value basis.
`(B) FACTORS- The Secretary concerned shall determine best value based on such factors as—
`(i) the technical demands and complexity of the work to be done;
`(ii)(I) the ecological objectives of the project; and
`(II) the sensitivity of the resources being treated;
`(iii) the past experience by the contractor with the type of work being done, using the type of equipment proposed for the project, and meeting or exceeding desired ecological conditions; and
`(iv) the commitment of the contractor to hiring highly qualified workers and local residents.
`(3) MERCHANTABLE TIMBER CONTRACTING PILOT PROGRAM-
`(A) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary concerned shall establish a pilot program to implement a certain percentage of approved projects involving the sale of merchantable timber using separate contracts for—
`(i) the harvesting or collection of merchantable timber; and
`(ii) the sale of the timber.
`(B) ANNUAL PERCENTAGES- Under the pilot program, the Secretary concerned shall ensure that, on a nationwide basis, not less than the following percentage of all approved projects involving the sale of merchantable timber are implemented using separate contracts:
`(i) For fiscal year 2008, 35 percent.
`(ii) For fiscal year 2009, 45 percent.
`(iii) For each of fiscal years 2010 and 2011, 50 percent.
`(C) INCLUSION IN PILOT PROGRAM- The decision whether to use separate contracts to implement a project involving the sale of merchantable timber shall be made by the Secretary concerned after the approval of the project under this title.
`(D) ASSISTANCE-
`(i) IN GENERAL- The Secretary concerned may use funds from any appropriated account available to the Secretary for the Federal land to assist in the administration of projects conducted under the pilot program.
`(ii) MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF ASSISTANCE- The total amount obligated under this subparagraph may not exceed $1,000,000 for any fiscal year during which the pilot program is in effect.
`(E) REVIEW AND REPORT-
`(i) INITIAL REPORT- Not later than September 30, 2010, the Comptroller General shall submit to the Committees on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry and Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committees on Agriculture and Natural Resources of the House of Representatives a report assessing the pilot program.
`(ii) ANNUAL REPORT- The Secretary concerned shall submit to the Committees on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry and Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committees on Agriculture and Natural Resources of the House of Representatives an annual report describing the results of the pilot program.
`(f) Requirements for Project Funds- The Secretary shall ensure that at least 50 percent of all project funds be used for projects that are primarily dedicated—
`(1) to road maintenance, decommissioning, or obliteration; or
`(2) to restoration of streams and watersheds.
`SEC. 205. RESOURCE ADVISORY COMMITTEES.
`(a) Establishment and Purpose of Resource Advisory Committees-
`(1) ESTABLISHMENT- The Secretary concerned shall establish and maintain resource advisory committees to perform the duties in subsection (b), except as provided in paragraph (4).
`(2) PURPOSE- The purpose of a resource advisory committee shall be—
`(A) to improve collaborative relationships; and
`(B) to provide advice and recommendations to the land management agencies consistent with the purposes of this title.
`(3) ACCESS TO RESOURCE ADVISORY COMMITTEES- To ensure that each unit of Federal land has access to a resource advisory committee, and that there is sufficient interest in participation on a committee to ensure that membership can be balanced in terms of the points of view represented and the functions to be performed, the Secretary concerned may, establish resource advisory committees for part of, or 1 or more, units of Federal land.
`(4) EXISTING ADVISORY COMMITTEES-
`(A) IN GENERAL- An advisory committee that meets the requirements of this section, a resource advisory committee established before September 29, 2006, or an advisory committee determined by the Secretary concerned before September 29, 2006, to meet the requirements of this section may be deemed by the Secretary concerned to be a resource advisory committee for the purposes of this title.
`(B) CHARTER- A charter for a committee described in subparagraph (A) that was filed on or before September 29, 2006, shall be considered to be filed for purposes of this Act.
`(C) BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEES- The Secretary of the Interior may deem a resource advisory committee meeting the requirements of subpart 1784 of part 1780 of title 43, Code of Federal Regulations, as a resource advisory committee for the purposes of this title.
`(b) Duties- A resource advisory committee shall—
`(1) review projects proposed under this title by participating counties and other persons;
`(2) propose projects and funding to the Secretary concerned under section 203;
`(3) provide early and continuous coordination with appropriate land management agency officials in recommending projects consistent with purposes of this Act under this title;
`(4) provide frequent opportunities for citizens, organizations, tribes, land management agencies, and other interested parties to participate openly and meaningfully, beginning at the early stages of the project development process under this title;
`(5)(A) monitor projects that have been approved under section 204; and
`(B) advise the designated Federal official on the progress of the monitoring efforts under subparagraph (A); and
`(6) make recommendations to the Secretary concerned for any appropriate changes or adjustments to the projects being monitored by the resource advisory committee.
`(c) Appointment by the Secretary-
`(1) APPOINTMENT AND TERM-
`(A) IN GENERAL- The Secretary concerned, shall appoint the members of resource advisory committees for a term of 4 years beginning on the date of appointment.
`(B) REAPPOINTMENT- The Secretary concerned may reappoint members to subsequent 4-year terms.
`(2) BASIC REQUIREMENTS- The Secretary concerned shall ensure that each resource advisory committee established meets the requirements of subsection (d).
`(3) INITIAL APPOINTMENT- Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary concerned shall make initial appointments to the resource advisory committees.
`(4) VACANCIES- The Secretary concerned shall make appointments to fill vacancies on any resource advisory committee as soon as practicable after the vacancy has occurred.
`(5) COMPENSATION- Members of the resource advisory committees shall not receive any compensation.
`(d) Composition of Advisory Committee-
`(1) NUMBER- Each resource advisory committee shall be comprised of 15 members.
`(2) COMMUNITY INTERESTS REPRESENTED- Committee members shall be representative of the interests of the following 3 categories:
`(A) 5 persons that—
`(i) represent organized labor or non-timber forest product harvester groups;
`(ii) represent developed outdoor recreation, off highway vehicle users, or commercial recreation activities;
`(iii) represent—
`(I) energy and mineral development interests; or
`(II) commercial or recreational fishing interests;
`(iv) represent the commercial timber industry; or
`(v) hold Federal grazing or other land use permits, or represent nonindustrial private forest land owners, within the area for which the committee is organized.
`(B) 5 persons that represent—
`(i) nationally recognized environmental organizations;
`(ii) regionally or locally recognized environmental organizations;
`(iii) dispersed recreational activities;
`(iv) archaeological and historical interests; or
`(v) nationally or regionally recognized wild horse and burro interest groups, wildlife or hunting organizations, or watershed associations.
`(C) 5 persons that—
`(i) hold State elected office (or a designee);
`(ii) hold county or local elected office;
`(iii) represent American Indian tribes within or adjacent to the area for which the committee is organized;
`(iv) are school officials or teachers; or
`(v) represent the affected public at large.
`(3) BALANCED REPRESENTATION- In appointing committee members from the 3 categories in paragraph (2), the Secretary concerned shall provide for balanced and broad representation from within each category.
`(4) GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION- The members of a resource advisory committee shall reside within the State in which the committee has jurisdiction and, to extent practicable, the Secretary concerned shall ensure local representation in each category in paragraph (2).
`(5) CHAIRPERSON- A majority on each resource advisory committee shall select the chairperson of the committee.
`(e) Approval Procedures-
`(1) IN GENERAL- Subject to paragraph (3), each resource advisory committee shall establish procedures for proposing projects to the Secretary concerned under this title.
`(2) QUORUM- A quorum must be present to constitute an official meeting of the committee.
`(3) APPROVAL BY MAJORITY OF MEMBERS- A project may be proposed by a resource advisory committee to the Secretary concerned under section 203(a), if the project has been approved by a majority of members of the committee from each of the 3 categories in subsection (d)(2).
`(f) Other Committee Authorities and Requirements-
`(1) STAFF ASSISTANCE- A resource advisory committee may submit to the Secretary concerned a request for periodic staff assistance from Federal employees under the jurisdiction of the Secretary.
`(2) MEETINGS- All meetings of a resource advisory committee shall be announced at least 1 week in advance in a local newspaper of record and shall be open to the public.
`(3) RECORDS- A resource advisory committee shall maintain records of the meetings of the committee and make the records available for public inspection.
`SEC. 206. USE OF PROJECT FUNDS.
`(a) Agreement Regarding Schedule and Cost of Project-
`(1) AGREEMENT BETWEEN PARTIES- The Secretary concerned may carry out a project submitted by a resource advisory committee under section 203(a) using project funds or other funds described in section 203(a)(2), if, as soon as practicable after the issuance of a decision document for the project and the exhaustion of all administrative appeals and judicial review of the project decision, the Secretary concerned and the resource advisory committee enter into an agreement addressing, at a minimum, the following:
`(A) The schedule for completing the project.
`(B) The total cost of the project, including the level of agency overhead to be assessed against the project.
`(C) For a multiyear project, the estimated cost of the project for each of the fiscal years in which it will be carried out.
`(D) The remedies for failure of the Secretary concerned to comply with the terms of the agreement consistent with current Federal law.
`(2) LIMITED USE OF FEDERAL FUNDS- The Secretary concerned may decide, at the sole discretion of the Secretary concerned, to cover the costs of a portion of an approved project using Federal funds appropriated or otherwise available to the Secretary for the same purposes as the project.
`(b) Transfer of Project Funds-
`(1) INITIAL TRANSFER REQUIRED- As soon as practicable after the agreement is reached under subsection (a) with regard to a project to be funded in whole or in part using project funds, or other funds described in section 203(a)(2), the Secretary concerned shall transfer to the applicable unit of National Forest System land or Bureau of Land Management District an amount of project funds equal to—
`(A) in the case of a project to be completed in a single fiscal year, the total amount specified in the agreement to be paid using project funds, or other funds described in section 203(a)(2); or
`(B) in the case of a multiyear project, the amount specified in the agreement to be paid using project funds, or other funds described in section 203(a)(2) for the first fiscal year.
`(2) CONDITION ON PROJECT COMMENCEMENT- The unit of National Forest System land or Bureau of Land Management District concerned, shall not commence a project until the project funds, or other funds described in section 203(a)(2) required to be transferred under paragraph (1) for the project, have been made available by the Secretary concerned.
`(3) SUBSEQUENT TRANSFERS FOR MULTIYEAR PROJECTS-
`(A) IN GENERAL- For the second and subsequent fiscal years of a multiyear project to be funded in whole or in part using project funds, the unit of National Forest System land or Bureau of Land Management District concerned shall use the amount of project funds required to continue the project in that fiscal year according to the agreement entered into under subsection (a).
`(B) SUSPENSION OF WORK- The Secretary concerned shall suspend work on the project if the project funds required by the agreement in the second and subsequent fiscal years are not available.
`SEC. 207. AVAILABILITY OF PROJECT FUNDS.
`(a) Submission of Proposed Projects To Obligate Funds- By September 30, 2008 (or as soon thereafter as the Secretary concerned determines is practicable), and each September 30 thereafter for each succeeding fiscal year through fiscal year 2011, a resource advisory committee shall submit to the Secretary concerned pursuant to section 203(a)(1) a sufficient number of project proposals that, if approved, would result in the obligation of at least the full amount of the project funds reserved by the participating county in the preceding fiscal year.
`(b) Use or Transfer of Unobligated Funds- Subject to section 208, if a resource advisory committee fails to comply with subsection (a) for a fiscal year, any project funds reserved by the participating county in the preceding fiscal year and remaining unobligated shall be available for use as part of the project submissions in the next fiscal year.
`(c) Effect of Rejection of Projects- Subject to section 208, any project funds reserved by a participating county in the preceding fiscal year that are unobligated at the end of a fiscal year because the Secretary concerned has rejected one or more proposed projects shall be available for use as part of the project submissions in the next fiscal year.
`(d) Effect of Court Orders-
`(1) IN GENERAL- If an approved project under this Act is enjoined or prohibited by a Federal court, the Secretary concerned shall return the unobligated project funds related to the project to the participating county or counties that reserved the funds.
`(2) EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS- The returned funds shall be available for the county to expend in the same manner as the funds reserved by the county under subparagraph (B) or (C)(i) of section 102(d)(1).
`SEC. 208. TERMINATION OF AUTHORITY.
`(a) In General- The authority to initiate projects under this title shall terminate on September 30, 2011.
`(b) Deposits in Treasury- Any project funds not obligated by September 30, 2012, shall be deposited in the Treasury of the United States.
`TITLE III—COUNTY FUNDS
`SEC. 301. DEFINITIONS.
`In this title:
`(1) COUNTY FUNDS- The term `county funds' means all funds an eligible county elects under section 102(d) to reserve for expenditure in accordance with this title.
`(2) PARTICIPATING COUNTY- The term `participating county' means an eligible county that elects under section 102(d) to expend a portion of the Federal funds received under section 102 in accordance with this title.
`SEC. 302. USE.
`(a) Authorized Uses- A participating county, including any applicable agencies of the participating county, shall use county funds, in accordance with this title, only—
`(1) to carry out activities under the Firewise Communities program to provide to homeowners in fire-sensitive ecosystems education on, and assistance with implementing, techniques in home siting, home construction, and home landscaping that can increase the protection of people and property from wildfires;
`(2) to reimburse the participating county for search and rescue and other emergency services, including firefighting, that are—
`(A) performed on Federal land after the date on which the use was approved under subsection (b);
`(B) paid for by the participating county; and
`(3) to develop community wildfire protection plans in coordination with the appropriate Secretary concerned.
`(b) Proposals- A participating county shall use county funds for a use described in subsection (a) only after a 45-day public comment period, at the beginning of which the participating county shall—
`(1) publish in any publications of local record a proposal that describes the proposed use of the county funds; and
`(2) submit the proposal to any resource advisory committee established under section 205 for the participating county.
`SEC. 303. CERTIFICATION.
`(a) In General- Not later than February 1 of the year after the year in which any county funds were expended by a participating county, the appropriate official of the participating county shall submit to the Secretary concerned a certification that the county funds expended in the applicable year have been used for the uses authorized under section 302(a), including a description of the amounts expended and the uses for which the amounts were expended.
`(b) Review- The Secretary concerned shall review the certifications submitted under subsection (a) as the Secretary concerned determines to be appropriate.
`SEC. 304. TERMINATION OF AUTHORITY.
`(a) In General- The authority to initiate projects under this title terminates on September 30, 2011.
`(b) Availability- Any county funds not obligated by September 30, 2012, shall be returned to the Treasury of the United States.
`TITLE IV—MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
`SEC. 401. REGULATIONS.
`The Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior shall issue regulations to carry out the purposes of this Act.
`SEC. 402. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
`There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act for each of fiscal years 2008 through 2011.
`SEC. 403. TREATMENT OF FUNDS AND REVENUES.
`(a) Relation to Other Appropriations- Funds made available under section 402 and funds made available to a Secretary concerned under section 206 shall be in addition to any other annual appropriations for the Forest Service and the Bureau of Land Management.
`(b) Deposit of Revenues and Other Funds- All revenues generated from projects pursuant to title II, including any interest accrued from the revenues, shall be deposited in the Treasury of the United States.'.
(b) Forest Receipt Payments to Eligible States and Counties-
(1) ACT OF MAY 23, 1908- The sixth paragraph under the heading `FOREST SERVICE' in the Act of May 23, 1908 (16 U.S.C. 500) is amended in the first sentence by striking `twenty-five percentum' and all that follows through `shall be paid' and inserting the following: `an amount equal to the annual average of 25 percent of all amounts received for the applicable fiscal year and each of the preceding 6 fiscal years from each national forest shall be paid'.
(2) WEEKS LAW- Section 13 of the Act of March 1, 1911 (commonly known as the `Weeks Law') (16 U.S.C. 500) is amended in the first sentence by striking `twenty-five percentum' and all that follows through `shall be paid' and inserting the following: `an amount equal to the annual average of 25 percent of all amounts received for the applicable fiscal year and each of the preceding 6 fiscal years from each national forest shall be paid'.
(c) Payments in Lieu of Taxes—
(1) IN GENERAL—
Section 6906 of title 31, United States Code, is amended to read as follows:
`Sec. 6906. Funding
`For each of fiscal years 2008 through 2012—
`(1) each county or other eligible unit of local government shall be entitled to payment under this chapter; and
`(2) sums shall be made available to the Secretary of the Interior for obligation or expenditure in accordance with this chapter.'.
(2) CONFORMING AMENDMENT- The table of sections for chapter 69 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by striking the item relating to section 6906 and inserting the following:
`6906. Funding.'.
(3) BUDGET SCOREKEEPING-
(A) IN GENERAL—
Notwithstanding the Budget Scorekeeping Guidelines and the accompanying list of programs and accounts set forth in the joint explanatory statement of the committee of conference accompanying Conference Report 105-217, the section in this title regarding Payments in Lieu of Taxes shall be treated in the baseline for purposes of section 257 of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (as in effect prior to September 30, 2002), and by the Chairmen of the House and Senate Budget Committees, as appropriate, for purposes of budget enforcement in the House and Senate, and under the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 as if Payment in Lieu of Taxes (14-1114-0-1-806) were an account designated as Appropriated Entitlements and Mandatories for Fiscal Year 1997 in the joint explanatory statement of the committee of conference accompanying Conference Report 105-217.
(B) EFFECTIVE DATE—
This paragraph shall remain in effect for the fiscal years to which the entitlement in section 6906 of title 31, United States Code (as amended by paragraph (1)), applies.
Sec. 602. Transfer To Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund.[edit]
Subparagraph (C) of section 402(i)(1) of the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 (30 U.S.C. 1232(i)(1)) is amended by striking `and $9,000,000 on October 1, 2009' and inserting `$9,000,000 on October 1, 2009, and $9,000,000 on October 1, 2010'.
TITLE VII—DISASTER RELIEF[edit]
Subtitle A—Heartland and Hurricane Ike Disaster Relief[edit]
Sec. 701. Short Title.[edit]
This subtitle may be cited as the `Heartland Disaster Tax Relief Act of 2008'.
Sec. 702. Temporary Tax Relief For Areas Damaged By 2008 Midwestern Severe Storms, Tornados, And Flooding.[edit]
(a) In General—
Subject to the modifications described in this section, the following provisions of or relating to the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall apply to any Midwestern disaster area in addition to the areas to which such provisions otherwise apply:
(1) GO ZONE BENEFITS-
(A) Section 1400N (relating to tax benefits) other than subsections (b), (d), (e), (i), (j), (m), and (o) thereof.
(B) Section 1400O (relating to education tax benefits).
(C) Section 1400P (relating to housing tax benefits).
(D) Section 1400Q (relating to special rules for use of retirement funds).
(E) Section 1400R(a) (relating to employee retention credit for employers).
(F) Section 1400S (relating to additional tax relief) other than subsection (d) thereof.
(G) Section 1400T (relating to special rules for mortgage revenue bonds).
(2) OTHER BENEFITS INCLUDED IN KATRINA EMERGENCY TAX RELIEF ACT OF 2005- Sections 302, 303, 304, 401, and 405 of the Katrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005.
(b) Midwestern Disaster Area-
(1) IN GENERAL—
For purposes of this section and for applying the substitutions described in subsections (d) and (e), the term `Midwestern disaster area' means an area—
(A) with respect to which a major disaster has been declared by the President on or after May 20, 2008, and before August 1, 2008, under section 401 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act by reason of severe storms, tornados, or flooding occurring in any of the States of Arkansas, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, and Wisconsin, and
(B) determined by the President to warrant individual or individual and public assistance from the Federal Government under such Act with respect to damages attributable to such severe storms, tornados, or flooding.
(2) CERTAIN BENEFITS AVAILABLE TO AREAS ELIGIBLE ONLY FOR PUBLIC ASSISTANCE—
For purposes of applying this section to benefits under the following provisions, paragraph (1) shall be applied without regard to subparagraph (B):
(A) Sections 1400Q, 1400S(b), and 1400S(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
(B) Sections 302, 401, and 405 of the Katrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005.
(c) References-
(1) AREA—
Any reference in such provisions to the Hurricane Katrina disaster area or the Gulf Opportunity Zone shall be treated as a reference to any Midwestern disaster area and any reference to the Hurricane Katrina disaster area or the Gulf Opportunity Zone within a State shall be treated as a reference to all Midwestern disaster areas within the State.
(2) ITEMS ATTRIBUTABLE TO DISASTER—
Any reference in such provisions to any loss, damage, or other item attributable to Hurricane Katrina shall be treated as a reference to any loss, damage, or other item attributable to the severe storms, tornados, or flooding giving rise to any Presidential declaration described in subsection (b)(1)(A).
(3) APPLICABLE DISASTER DATE—
For purposes of applying the substitutions described in subsections (d) and (e), the term `applicable disaster date' means, with respect to any Midwestern disaster area, the date on which the severe storms, tornados, or flooding giving rise to the Presidential declaration described in subsection (b)(1)(A) occurred.
(d) Modifications to 1986 Code—
The following provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall be applied with the following modifications:
(1) TAX-EXEMPT BOND FINANCING—
Section 1400N(a)—
(A) by substituting `qualified Midwestern disaster area bond' for `qualified Gulf Opportunity Zone Bond' each place it appears, except that in determining whether a bond is a qualified Midwestern disaster area bond—
(i) paragraph (2)(A)(i) shall be applied by only treating costs as qualified project costs if—
(I) in the case of a project involving a private business use (as defined in section 141(b)(6)), either the person using the property suffered a loss in a trade or business attributable to the severe storms, tornados, or flooding giving rise to any Presidential declaration described in subsection (b)(1)(A) or is a person designated for purposes of this section by the Governor of the State in which the project is located as a person carrying on a trade or business replacing a trade or business with respect to which another person suffered such a loss, and
(II) in the case of a project relating to public utility property, the project involves repair or reconstruction of public utility property damaged by such severe storms, tornados, or flooding, and
(ii) paragraph (2)(A)(ii) shall be applied by treating an issue as a qualified mortgage issue only if 95 percent or more of the net proceeds (as defined in section 150(a)(3)) of the issue are to be used to provide financing for mortgagors who suffered damages to their principal residences attributable to such severe storms, tornados, or flooding.
(B) by substituting `any State in which a Midwestern disaster area is located' for `the State of Alabama, Louisiana, or Mississippi' in paragraph (2)(B),
(C) by substituting `designated for purposes of this section (on the basis of providing assistance to areas in the order in which such assistance is most needed)' for `designated for purposes of this section' in paragraph (2)(C),
(D) by substituting `January 1, 2013' for `January 1, 2011' in paragraph (2)(D),
(E) in paragraph (3)(A)—
(i) by substituting `$1,000' for `$2,500', and
(ii) by substituting `before the earliest applicable disaster date for Midwestern disaster areas within the State' for `before August 28, 2005',
(F) by substituting `qualified Midwestern disaster area repair or construction' for `qualified GO Zone repair or construction' each place it appears,
(G) by substituting `after the date of the enactment of the Heartland Disaster Tax Relief Act of 2008 and before January 1, 2013' for `after the date of the enactment of this paragraph and before January 1, 2011' in paragraph (7)(C), and
(H) by disregarding paragraph (8) thereof.
(2) LOW-INCOME HOUSING CREDIT—
Section 1400N(c)—
(A) only with respect to calendar years 2008, 2009, and 2010,
(B) by substituting `Disaster Recovery Assistance housing amount' for `Gulf Opportunity housing amount' each place it appears,
(C) in paragraph (1)(B)—
(i) by substituting `$8.00' for `$18.00', and
(ii) by substituting `before the earliest applicable disaster date for Midwestern disaster areas within the State' for `before August 28, 2005', and
(D) determined without regard to paragraphs (2), (3), (4), (5), and (6) thereof.
(3) EXPENSING FOR CERTAIN DEMOLITION AND CLEAN-UP COSTS—
Section 1400N(f)—
(A) by substituting `qualified Disaster Recovery Assistance clean-up cost' for `qualified Gulf Opportunity Zone clean-up cost' each place it appears,
(B) by substituting `beginning on the applicable disaster date and ending on December 31, 2010' for `beginning on August 28, 2005, and ending on December 31, 2007' in paragraph (2), and
(C) by treating costs as qualified Disaster Recovery Assistance clean-up costs only if the removal of debris or demolition of any structure was necessary due to damage attributable to the severe storms, tornados, or flooding giving rise to any Presidential declaration described in subsection (b)(1)(A).
(4) EXTENSION OF EXPENSING FOR ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION COSTS—
Section 1400N(g)—
(A) by substituting `the applicable disaster date' for `August 28, 2005' each place it appears,
(B) by substituting `January 1, 2011' for `January 1, 2008' in paragraph (1),
(C) by substituting `December 31, 2010' for `December 31, 2007' in paragraph (1), and
(D) by treating a site as a qualified contaminated site only if the release (or threat of release) or disposal of a hazardous substance at the site was attributable to the severe storms, tornados, or flooding giving rise to any Presidential declaration described in subsection (b)(1)(A).
(5) INCREASE IN REHABILITATION CREDIT—
Section 1400N(h), as amended by this Act—
(A) by substituting `the applicable disaster date' for `August 28, 2005',
(B) by substituting `December 31, 2011' for `December 31, 2009' in paragraph (1), and
(C) by only applying such subsection to qualified rehabilitation expenditures with respect to any building or structure which was damaged or destroyed as a result of the severe storms, tornados, or flooding giving rise to any Presidential declaration described in subsection (b)(1)(A).
(6) TREATMENT OF NET OPERATING LOSSES ATTRIBUTABLE TO DISASTER LOSSES—
Section 1400N(k)—
(A) by substituting `qualified Disaster Recovery Assistance loss' for `qualified Gulf Opportunity Zone loss' each place it appears,
(B) by substituting `after the day before the applicable disaster date, and before January 1, 2011' for `after August 27, 2005, and before January 1, 2008' each place it appears,
(C) by substituting `the applicable disaster date' for `August 28, 2005' in paragraph (2)(B)(ii)(I),
(D) by substituting `qualified Disaster Recovery Assistance property' for `qualified Gulf Opportunity Zone property' in paragraph (2)(B)(iv), and
(E) by substituting `qualified Disaster Recovery Assistance casualty loss' for `qualified Gulf Opportunity Zone casualty loss' each place it appears.
(7) CREDIT TO HOLDERS OF TAX CREDIT BONDS—
Section 1400N(l)—
(A) by substituting `Midwestern tax credit bond' for `Gulf tax credit bond' each place it appears,
(B) by substituting `any State in which a Midwestern disaster area is located or any instrumentality of the State' for `the State of Alabama, Louisiana, or Mississippi' in paragraph (4)(A)(i),
(C) by substituting `after December 31, 2008 and before January 1, 2010' for `after December 31, 2005, and before January 1, 2007',
(D) by substituting `shall not exceed $100,000,000 for any State with an aggregate population located in all Midwestern disaster areas within the State of at least 2,000,000, $50,000,000 for any State with an aggregate population located in all Midwestern disaster areas within the State of at least 1,000,000 but less than 2,000,000, and zero for any other State. The population of a State within any area shall be determined on the basis of the most recent census estimate of resident population released by the Bureau of Census before the earliest applicable disaster date for Midwestern disaster areas within the State.' for `shall not exceed' and all that follows in paragraph (4)(C), and
(E) by substituting `the earliest applicable disaster date for Midwestern disaster areas within the State' for `August 28, 2005' in paragraph (5)(A).
(8) EDUCATION TAX BENEFITS—
Section 1400O, by substituting `2008 or 2009' for `2005 or 2006'.
(9) HOUSING TAX BENEFITS—
Section 1400P, by substituting `the applicable disaster date' for `August 28, 2005' in subsection (c)(1).
(10) SPECIAL RULES FOR USE OF RETIREMENT FUNDS—
Section 1400Q—
(A) by substituting `qualified Disaster Recovery Assistance distribution' for `qualified hurricane distribution' each place it appears,
(B) by substituting `on or after the applicable disaster date and before January 1, 2010' for `on or after August 25, 2005, and before January 1, 2007' in subsection (a)(4)(A)(i),
(C) by substituting `the applicable disaster date' for `August 28, 2005' in subsections (a)(4)(A)(i) and (c)(3)(B),
(D) by disregarding clauses (ii) and (iii) of subsection (a)(4)(A) thereof,
(E) by substituting `qualified storm damage distribution' for `qualified Katrina distribution' each place it appears,
(F) by substituting `after the date which is 6 months before the applicable disaster date and before the date which is the day after the applicable disaster date' for `after February 28, 2005, and before August 29, 2005' in subsection (b)(2)(B)(ii),
(G) by substituting `the Midwestern disaster area, but not so purchased or constructed on account of severe storms, tornados, or flooding giving rise to the designation of the area as a disaster area' for `the Hurricane Katrina disaster area, but not so purchased or constructed on account of Hurricane Katrina' in subsection (b)(2)(B)(iii),
(H) by substituting `beginning on the applicable disaster date and ending on the date which is 5 months after the date of the enactment of the Heartland Disaster Tax Relief Act of 2008' for `beginning on August 25, 2005, and ending on February 28, 2006' in subsection (b)(3)(A),
(I) by substituting `qualified storm damage individual' for `qualified Hurricane Katrina individual' each place it appears,
(J) by substituting `December 31, 2009' for `December 31, 2006' in subsection (c)(2)(A),
(K) by disregarding subparagraphs (C) and (D) of subsection (c)(3) thereof,
(L) by substituting `beginning on the date of the enactment of the Heartland Disaster Tax Relief Act of 2008 and ending on December 31, 2009' for `beginning on September 24, 2005, and ending on December 31, 2006' in subsection (c)(4)(A)(i),
(M) by substituting `the applicable disaster date' for `August 25, 2005' in subsection (c)(4)(A)(ii), and
(N) by substituting `January 1, 2010' for `January 1, 2007' in subsection (d)(2)(A)(ii).
(11) EMPLOYEE RETENTION CREDIT FOR EMPLOYERS AFFECTED BY SEVERE STORMS, TORNADOS, AND FLOODING—
Section 1400R(a)—
(A) by substituting `the applicable disaster date' for `August 28, 2005' each place it appears,
(B) by substituting `January 1, 2009' for `January 1, 2006' both places it appears, and
(C) only with respect to eligible employers who employed an average of not more than 200 employees on business days during the taxable year before the applicable disaster date.
(12) TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF LIMITATIONS ON CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS—
Section 1400S(a), by substituting the following paragraph for paragraph (4) thereof:
`(4) QUALIFIED CONTRIBUTIONS-
`(A) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified contribution' means any charitable contribution (as defined in section 170(c)) if—
`(i) such contribution—
`(I) is paid during the period beginning on the earliest applicable disaster date for all States and ending on December 31, 2008, in cash to an organization described in section 170(b)(1)(A), and
`(II) is made for relief efforts in 1 or more Midwestern disaster areas,
`(ii) the taxpayer obtains from such organization contemporaneous written acknowledgment (within the meaning of section 170(f)(8)) that such contribution was used (or is to be used) for relief efforts in 1 or more Midwestern disaster areas, and
`(iii) the taxpayer has elected the application of this subsection with respect to such contribution.
`(B) EXCEPTION- Such term shall not include a contribution by a donor if the contribution is—
`(i) to an organization described in section 509(a)(3), or
`(ii) for establishment of a new, or maintenance of an existing, donor advised fund (as defined in section 4966(d)(2)).
`(C) APPLICATION OF ELECTION TO PARTNERSHIPS AND S CORPORATIONS- In the case of a partnership or S corporation, the election under subparagraph (A)(iii) shall be made separately by each partner or shareholder.'.
(13) SUSPENSION OF CERTAIN LIMITATIONS ON PERSONAL CASUALTY LOSSES—
Section 1400S(b)(1), by substituting `the applicable disaster date' for `August 25, 2005'.
(14) SPECIAL RULE FOR DETERMINING EARNED INCOME—
Section 1400S(d)—
(A) by treating an individual as a qualified individual if such individual's principal place of abode on the applicable disaster date was located in a Midwestern disaster area,
(B) by treating the applicable disaster date with respect to any such individual as the applicable date for purposes of such subsection, and
(C) by treating an area as described in paragraph (2)(B)(ii) thereof if the area is a Midwestern disaster area only by reason of subsection (b)(2) of this section (relating to areas eligible only for public assistance).
(15) ADJUSTMENTS REGARDING TAXPAYER AND DEPENDENCY STATUS—
Section 1400S(e), by substituting `2008 or 2009' for `2005 or 2006'.
(e) Modifications to Katrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005—
The following provisions of the Katrina Emergency Tax Relief Act of 2005 shall be applied with the following modifications:
(1) ADDITIONAL EXEMPTION FOR HOUSING DISPLACED INDIVIDUAL—
Section 302—
(A) by substituting `2008 or 2009' for `2005 or 2006' in subsection (a) thereof,
(B) by substituting `Midwestern displaced individual' for `Hurricane Katrina displaced individual' each place it appears, and
(C) by treating an area as a core disaster area for purposes of applying subsection (c) thereof if the area is a Midwestern disaster area without regard to subsection (b)(2) of this section (relating to areas eligible only for public assistance).
(2) INCREASE IN STANDARD MILEAGE RATE—
Section 303, by substituting `beginning on the applicable disaster date and ending on December 31, 2008' for `beginning on August 25, 2005, and ending on December 31, 2006'.
(3) MILEAGE REIMBURSEMENTS FOR CHARITABLE VOLUNTEERS—
Section 304—
(A) by substituting `beginning on the applicable disaster date and ending on December 31, 2008' for `beginning on August 25, 2005, and ending on December 31, 2006' in subsection (a), and
(B) by substituting `the applicable disaster date' for `August 25, 2005' in subsection (a).
(4) EXCLUSION OF CERTAIN CANCELLATION OF INDEBTEDNESS INCOME—
Section 401—
(A) by treating an individual whose principal place of abode on the applicable disaster date was in a Midwestern disaster area (determined without regard to subsection (b)(2) of this section) as an individual described in subsection (b)(1) thereof, and by treating an individual whose principal place of abode on the applicable disaster date was in a Midwestern disaster area solely by reason of subsection (b)(2) of this section as an individual described in subsection (b)(2) thereof,
(B) by substituting `the applicable disaster date' for `August 28, 2005' both places it appears, and
(C) by substituting `January 1, 2010' for `January 1, 2007' in subsection (e).
(5) EXTENSION OF REPLACEMENT PERIOD FOR NONRECOGNITION OF GAIN—
Section 405, by substituting `on or after the applicable disaster date' for `on or after August 25, 2005'.
Sec. 703. Reporting Requirements Relating To Disaster Relief Contributions.[edit]
(a) In General—
Section 6033(b) (relating to returns of certain organizations described in section 501(c)(3)) is amended by striking `and' at the end of paragraph (13), by redesignating paragraph (14) as paragraph (15), and by adding after paragraph (13) the following new paragraph:
`(14) such information as the Secretary may require with respect to disaster relief activities, including the amount and use of qualified contributions to which section 1400S(a) applies, and'.
(b) Effective Date—
The amendments made by this section shall apply to returns the due date for which (determined without regard to any extension) occurs after December 31, 2008.
Sec. 704. Temporary Tax-exempt Bond Financing And Low-income Housing Tax Relief For Areas Damaged By Hurricane Ike.[edit]
(a) Tax-Exempt Bond Financing—
Section 1400N(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall apply to any Hurricane Ike disaster area in addition to any other area referenced in such section, but with the following modifications:
(1) By substituting `qualified Hurricane Ike disaster area bond' for `qualified Gulf Opportunity Zone Bond' each place it appears, except that in determining whether a bond is a qualified Hurricane Ike disaster area bond—
(A) paragraph (2)(A)(i) shall be applied by only treating costs as qualified project costs if—
(i) in the case of a project involving a private business use (as defined in section 141(b)(6)), either the person using the property suffered a loss in a trade or business attributable to Hurricane Ike or is a person designated for purposes of this section by the Governor of the State in which the project is located as a person carrying on a trade or business replacing a trade or business with respect to which another person suffered such a loss, and
(ii) in the case of a project relating to public utility property, the project involves repair or reconstruction of public utility property damaged by Hurricane Ike, and
(B) paragraph (2)(A)(ii) shall be applied by treating an issue as a qualified mortgage issue only if 95 percent or more of the net proceeds (as defined in section 150(a)(3)) of the issue are to be used to provide financing for mortgagors who suffered damages to their principal residences attributable to Hurricane Ike.
(2) By substituting `any State in which any Hurricane Ike disaster area is located' for `the State of Alabama, Louisiana, or Mississippi' in paragraph (2)(B).
(3) By substituting `designated for purposes of this section (on the basis of providing assistance to areas in the order in which such assistance is most needed)' for `designated for purposes of this section' in paragraph (2)(C).
(4) By substituting `January 1, 2013' for `January 1, 2011' in paragraph (2)(D).
(5) By substituting the following for subparagraph (A) of paragraph (3):
`(A) AGGREGATE AMOUNT DESIGNATED- The maximum aggregate face amount of bonds which may be designated under this subsection with respect to any State shall not exceed the product of $2,000 multiplied by the portion of the State population which is in—
`(i) in the case of Texas, the counties of Brazoria, Chambers, Galveston, Jefferson, and Orange, and
`(ii) in the case of Louisiana, the parishes of Calcasieu and Cameron,
(as determined on the basis of the most recent census estimate of resident population released by the Bureau of Census before September 13, 2008).'.
(6) By substituting `qualified Hurricane Ike disaster area repair or construction' for `qualified GO Zone repair or construction' each place it appears.
(7) By substituting `after the date of the enactment of the Heartland Disaster Tax Relief Act of 2008 and before January 1, 2013' for `after the date of the enactment of this paragraph and before January 1, 2011' in paragraph (7)(C).
(8) By disregarding paragraph (8) thereof.
(9) By substituting `any Hurricane Ike disaster area' for `the Gulf Opportunity Zone' each place it appears.
(c) Low-Income Housing Credit- Section 1400N(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall apply to any Hurricane Ike disaster area in addition to any other area referenced in such section, but with the following modifications:
(1) Only with respect to calendar years 2008, 2009, and 2010.
(2) By substituting `any Hurricane Ike disaster area' for `the Gulf Opportunity Zone' each place it appears.
(3) By substituting `Hurricane Ike Recovery Assistance housing amount' for `Gulf Opportunity housing amount' each place it appears.
(4) By substituting the following for subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1):
`(B) HURRICANE IKE HOUSING AMOUNT- For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `Hurricane Ike housing amount' means, for any calendar year, the amount equal to the product of $16.00 multiplied by the portion of the State population which is in—
`(i) in the case of Texas, the counties of Brazoria, Chambers, Galveston, Jefferson, and Orange, and
`(ii) in the case of Louisiana, the parishes of Calcasieu and Cameron,
`(as determined on the basis of the most recent census estimate of resident population released by the Bureau of Census before September 13, 2008).'.
(5) Determined without regard to paragraphs (2), (3), (4), (5), and (6) thereof.
(c) Hurricane Ike Disaster Area—
For purposes of this section and for applying the substitutions described in subsections (a) and (b), the term `Hurricane Ike disaster area' means an area in the State of Texas or Louisiana—
(1) with respect to which a major disaster has been declared by the President on September 13, 2008, under section 401 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act by reason of Hurricane Ike, and
(2) determined by the President to warrant individual or individual and public assistance from the Federal Government under such Act with respect to damages attributable to Hurricane Ike.
Subtitle B—National Disaster Relief[edit]
Sec. 706. Losses Attributable To Federally Declared Disasters.[edit]
(a) Waiver of Adjusted Gross Income Limitation-
(1) IN GENERAL—
Subsection (h) of section 165 is amended by redesignating paragraphs (3) and (4) as paragraphs (4) and (5), respectively, and by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraph:
`(3) SPECIAL RULE FOR LOSSES IN FEDERALLY DECLARED DISASTERS-
`(A) IN GENERAL- If an individual has a net disaster loss for any taxable year, the amount determined under paragraph (2)(A)(ii) shall be the sum of—
`(i) such net disaster loss, and
`(ii) so much of the excess referred to in the matter preceding clause (i) of paragraph (2)(A) (reduced by the amount in clause (i) of this subparagraph) as exceeds 10 percent of the adjusted gross income of the individual.
`(B) NET DISASTER LOSS- For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `net disaster loss' means the excess of—
`(i) the personal casualty losses—
`(I) attributable to a federally declared disaster occurring before January 1, 2010, and
`(II) occurring in a disaster area, over
`(ii) personal casualty gains.
`(C) FEDERALLY DECLARED DISASTER- For purposes of this paragraph—
`(i) FEDERALLY DECLARED DISASTER- The term `federally declared disaster' means any disaster subsequently determined by the President of the United States to warrant assistance by the Federal Government under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act.
`(ii) DISASTER AREA- The term `disaster area' means the area so determined to warrant such assistance.'.
(2) CONFORMING AMENDMENTS—
(A) Section 165(h)(4)(B) (as so redesignated) is amended by striking `paragraph (2)' and inserting `paragraphs (2) and (3)'.
(B) Section 165(i)(1) is amended by striking `loss' and all that follows through `Act' and inserting `loss occurring in a disaster area (as defined by clause (ii) of subsection (h)(3)(C)) and attributable to a federally declared disaster (as defined by clause (i) of such subsection)'.
(C) Section 165(i)(4) is amended by striking `Presidentially declared disaster (as defined by section 1033(h)(3))' and inserting `federally declared disaster (as defined by subsection (h)(3)(C)(i)'.
(D)(i) So much of subsection (h) of section 1033 as precedes subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) thereof is amended to read as follows:
`(h) Special Rules for Property Damaged by Federally Declared Disasters-
`(1) PRINCIPAL RESIDENCES- If the taxpayer's principal residence or any of its contents is located in a disaster area and is compulsorily or involuntarily converted as a result of a federally declared disaster—'.
(ii) Paragraph (2) of section 1033(h) is amended by striking `investment' and all that follows through `disaster' and inserting `investment located in a disaster area and compulsorily or involuntarily converted as a result of a federally declared disaster'.
(iii) Paragraph (3) of section 1033(h) is amended to read as follows:
`(3) FEDERALLY DECLARED DISASTER; DISASTER AREA- The terms `federally declared disaster' and `disaster area' shall have the respective meaning given such terms by section 165(h)(3)(C).'.
(iv) Section 139(c)(2) is amended to read as follows:
`(2) federally declared disaster (as defined by section 165(h)(3)(C)(i)),'.
(v) Subclause (II) of section 172(b)(1)(F)(ii) is amended by striking `Presidentially declared disasters (as defined in section 1033(h)(3))' and inserting `federally declared disasters (as defined by subsection (h)(3)(C)(i))'.
(vi) Subclause (III) of section 172(b)(1)(F)(ii) is amended by striking `Presidentially declared disasters' and inserting `federally declared disasters'.
(vii) Subsection (a) of section 7508A is amended by striking `Presidentially declared disaster (as defined in section 1033(h)(3))' and inserting `federally declared disaster (as defined by section 165(h)(3)(C)(i))'.
(b) Increase in Standard Deduction by Disaster Casualty Loss—
(1) IN GENERAL—
Paragraph (1) of section 63(c), as amended by the Housing Assistance Tax Act of 2008, is amended by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (B), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (C) and inserting `, and', and by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
`(D) the disaster loss deduction.'.
(2) DISASTER LOSS DEDUCTION—
Subsection (c) of section 63, as amended by the Housing Assistance Tax Act of 2008, is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
`(8) DISASTER LOSS DEDUCTION- For the purposes of paragraph (1), the term `disaster loss deduction' means the net disaster loss (as defined in section 165(h)(3)(B)).'.
(3) ALLOWANCE IN COMPUTING ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM TAXABLE INCOME—
Subparagraph (E) of section 56(b)(1) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: `The preceding sentence shall not apply to so much of the standard deduction as is determined under section 63(c)(1)(D).'.
(c) Increase in Limitation on Individual Loss Per Casualty—
Paragraph (1) of section 165(h) is amended by striking `$100' and inserting `$500 ($100 for taxable years beginning after December 31, 2009)'.
(d) Effective Dates—
(1) IN GENERAL—
Except as provided by paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall apply to disasters declared in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007.
(2) INCREASE IN LIMITATION ON INDIVIDUAL LOSS PER CASUALTY—
The amendment made by subsection (c) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2008.
Sec. 707. Expensing Of Qualified Disaster Expenses.[edit]
(a) In General—
Part VI of subchapter B of chapter 1 is amended by inserting after section 198 the following new section:
`SEC. 198A. EXPENSING OF QUALIFIED DISASTER EXPENSES.
`(a) In General- A taxpayer may elect to treat any qualified disaster expenses which are paid or incurred by the taxpayer as an expense which is not chargeable to capital account. Any expense which is so treated shall be allowed as a deduction for the taxable year in which it is paid or incurred.
`(b) Qualified Disaster Expense- For purposes of this section, the term `qualified disaster expense' means any expenditure—
`(1) which is paid or incurred in connection with a trade or business or with business-related property,
`(2) which is—
`(A) for the abatement or control of hazardous substances that were released on account of a federally declared disaster occurring before January 1, 2010,
`(B) for the removal of debris from, or the demolition of structures on, real property which is business-related property damaged or destroyed as a result of a federally declared disaster occurring before such date, or
`(C) for the repair of business-related property damaged as a result of a federally declared disaster occurring before such date, and
`(3) which is otherwise chargeable to capital account.
`(c) Other Definitions- For purposes of this section—
`(1) BUSINESS-RELATED PROPERTY- The term `business-related property' means property—
`(A) held by the taxpayer for use in a trade or business or for the production of income, or
`(B) described in section 1221(a)(1) in the hands of the taxpayer.
`(2) FEDERALLY DECLARED DISASTER- The term `federally declared disaster' has the meaning given such term by section 165(h)(3)(C)(i).
`(d) Deduction Recaptured as Ordinary Income on Sale, etc- Solely for purposes of section 1245, in the case of property to which a qualified disaster expense would have been capitalized but for this section—
`(1) the deduction allowed by this section for such expense shall be treated as a deduction for depreciation, and
`(2) such property (if not otherwise section 1245 property) shall be treated as section 1245 property solely for purposes of applying section 1245 to such deduction.
`(e) Coordination With Other Provisions- Sections 198, 280B, and 468 shall not apply to amounts which are treated as expenses under this section.
`(f) Regulations- The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this section.'.
(b) Clerical Amendment—
The table of sections for part VI of subchapter B of chapter 1 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 198 the following new item:
`Sec. 198A. Expensing of Qualified Disaster Expenses.'.
(c) Effective Date—
The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts paid or incurred after December 31, 2007 in connection with disaster declared after such date.
Sec. 708. Net Operating Losses Attributable To Federally Declared Disasters.[edit]
(a) In General—
Paragraph (1) of section 172(b) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
`(J) CERTAIN LOSSES ATTRIBUTABLE FEDERALLY DECLARED DISASTERS- In the case of a taxpayer who has a qualified disaster loss (as defined in subsection (j)), such loss shall be a net operating loss carryback to each of the 5 taxable years preceding the taxable year of such loss.'.
(b) Qualified Disaster Loss—
Section 172 is amended by redesignating subsections (j) and (k) as subsections (k) and (l), respectively, and by inserting after subsection (i) the following new subsection:
`(j) Rules Relating to Qualified Disaster Losses- For purposes of this section—
`(1) IN GENERAL- The term `qualified disaster loss' means the lesser of—
`(A) the sum of—
`(i) the losses allowable under section 165 for the taxable year—
`(I) attributable to a federally declared disaster (as defined in section 165(h)(3)(C)(i)) occurring before January 1, 2010, and
`(II) occurring in a disaster area (as defined in section 165(h)(3)(C)(ii)), and
`(ii) the deduction for the taxable year for qualified disaster expenses which is allowable under section 198A(a) or which would be so allowable if not otherwise treated as an expense, or
`(B) the net operating loss for such taxable year.
`(2) COORDINATION WITH SUBSECTION (b)(2)- For purposes of applying subsection (b)(2), a qualified disaster loss for any taxable year shall be treated in a manner similar to the manner in which a specified liability loss is treated.
`(3) ELECTION- Any taxpayer entitled to a 5-year carryback under subsection (b)(1)(J) from any loss year may elect to have the carryback period with respect to such loss year determined without regard to subsection (b)(1)(J). Such election shall be made in such manner as may be prescribed by the Secretary and shall be made by the due date (including extensions of time) for filing the taxpayer's return for the taxable year of the net operating loss. Such election, once made for any taxable year, shall be irrevocable for such taxable year.
`(4) EXCLUSION- The term `qualified disaster loss' shall not include any loss with respect to any property described in section 1400N(p)(3).'.
(c) Loss Deduction Allowed in Computing Alternative Minimum Taxable Income—
Subsection (d) of section 56 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
`(3) NET OPERATING LOSS ATTRIBUTABLE TO FEDERALLY DECLARED DISASTERS- In the case of a taxpayer which has a qualified disaster loss (as defined by section 172(b)(1)(J)) for the taxable year, paragraph (1) shall be applied by increasing the amount determined under subparagraph (A)(ii)(I) thereof by the sum of the carrybacks and carryovers of such loss.'.
(d) Conforming Amendments—
(1) Clause (ii) of section 172(b)(1)(F) is amended by inserting `or qualified disaster loss (as defined in subsection (j))' before the period at the end of the last sentence.
(1) Paragraph (1) of section 172(i) is amended by adding at the end the following new flush sentence:
`Such term shall not include any qualified disaster loss (as defined in subsection (j)).'.
(e) Effective Date—
The amendments made by this section shall apply to losses arising in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007, in connection with disasters declared after such date.
Sec. 709. Waiver Of Certain Mortgage Revenue Bond Requirements Following Federally Declared Disasters.[edit]
(a) In General—
Subsection (k) of section 143 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph:
`(12) SPECIAL RULES FOR RESIDENCES DESTROYED IN FEDERALLY DECLARED DISASTERS-
`(A) PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE DESTROYED- At the election of the taxpayer, if the principal residence (within the meaning of section 121) of such taxpayer is—
`(i) rendered unsafe for use as a residence by reason of a federally declared disaster occurring before January 1, 2010, or
`(ii) demolished or relocated by reason of an order of the government of a State or political subdivision thereof on account of a federally declared disaster occurring before such date,
`then, for the 2-year period beginning on the date of the disaster declaration, subsection (d)(1) shall not apply with respect to such taxpayer and subsection (e) shall be applied by substituting `110' for `90' in paragraph (1) thereof.
`(B) PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE DAMAGED-
`(i) IN GENERAL- At the election of the taxpayer, if the principal residence (within the meaning of section 121) of such taxpayer was damaged as the result of a federally declared disaster occurring before January 1, 2010, any owner-financing provided in connection with the repair or reconstruction of such residence shall be treated as a qualified rehabilitation loan.
`(ii) LIMITATION- The aggregate owner-financing to which clause (i) applies shall not exceed the lesser of—
`(I) the cost of such repair or reconstruction, or
`(II) $150,000.
`(C) FEDERALLY DECLARED DISASTER- For purposes of this paragraph, the term `federally declared disaster' has the meaning given such term by section 165(h)(3)(C)(i).
`(D) ELECTION; DENIAL OF DOUBLE BENEFIT-
`(i) ELECTION- An election under this paragraph may not be revoked except with the consent of the Secretary.
`(ii) DENIAL OF DOUBLE BENEFIT- If a taxpayer elects the application of this paragraph, paragraph (11) shall not apply with respect to the purchase or financing of any residence by such taxpayer.'.
(b) Effective Date—
The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to disasters occurring after December 31, 2007.
Sec. 710. Special Depreciation Allowance For Qualified Disaster Property.[edit]
(a) In General—
Section 168, as amended by this Act, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
`(n) Special Allowance for Qualified Disaster Assistance Property-
`(1) IN GENERAL- In the case of any qualified disaster assistance property—
`(A) the depreciation deduction provided by section 167(a) for the taxable year in which such property is placed in service shall include an allowance equal to 50 percent of the adjusted basis of the qualified disaster assistance property, and
`(B) the adjusted basis of the qualified disaster assistance property shall be reduced by the amount of such deduction before computing the amount otherwise allowable as a depreciation deduction under this chapter for such taxable year and any subsequent taxable year.
`(2) QUALIFIED DISASTER ASSISTANCE PROPERTY- For purposes of this subsection—
`(A) IN GENERAL- The term `qualified disaster assistance property' means any property—
`(i)(I) which is described in subsection (k)(2)(A)(i), or
`(II) which is nonresidential real property or residential rental property,
`(ii) substantially all of the use of which is—
`(I) in a disaster area with respect to a federally declared disaster occurring before January 1, 2010, and
`(II) in the active conduct of a trade or business by the taxpayer in such disaster area,
`(iii) which—
`(I) rehabilitates property damaged, or replaces property destroyed or condemned, as a result of such federally declared disaster, except that, for purposes of this clause, property shall be treated as replacing property destroyed or condemned if, as part of an integrated plan, such property replaces property which is included in a continuous area which includes real property destroyed or condemned, and
`(II) is similar in nature to, and located in the same county as, the property being rehabilitated or replaced,
`(iv) the original use of which in such disaster area commences with an eligible taxpayer on or after the applicable disaster date,
`(v) which is acquired by such eligible taxpayer by purchase (as defined in section 179(d)) on or after the applicable disaster date, but only if no written binding contract for the acquisition was in effect before such date, and
`(vi) which is placed in service by such eligible taxpayer on or before the date which is the last day of the third calendar year following the applicable disaster date (the fourth calendar year in the case of nonresidential real property and residential rental property).
`(B) EXCEPTIONS-
`(i) OTHER BONUS DEPRECIATION PROPERTY- The term `qualified disaster assistance property' shall not include—
`(I) any property to which subsection (k) (determined without regard to paragraph (4)), (l), or (m) applies,
`(II) any property to which section 1400N(d) applies, and
`(III) any property described in section 1400N(p)(3).
`(ii) ALTERNATIVE DEPRECIATION PROPERTY- The term `qualified disaster assistance property' shall not include any property to which the alternative depreciation system under subsection (g) applies, determined without regard to paragraph (7) of subsection (g) (relating to election to have system apply).
`(iii) TAX-EXEMPT BOND FINANCED PROPERTY- Such term shall not include any property any portion of which is financed with the proceeds of any obligation the interest on which is exempt from tax under section 103.
`(iv) QUALIFIED REVITALIZATION BUILDINGS- Such term shall not include any qualified revitalization building with respect to which the taxpayer has elected the application of paragraph (1) or (2) of section 1400I(a).
`(v) ELECTION OUT- If a taxpayer makes an election under this clause with respect to any class of property for any taxable year, this subsection shall not apply to all property in such class placed in service during such taxable year.
`(C) SPECIAL RULES- For purposes of this subsection, rules similar to the rules of subparagraph (E) of subsection (k)(2) shall apply, except that such subparagraph shall be applied—
`(i) by substituting `the applicable disaster date' for `December 31, 2007' each place it appears therein,
`(ii) without regard to `and before January 1, 2009' in clause (i) thereof, and
`(iii) by substituting `qualified disaster assistance property' for `qualified property' in clause (iv) thereof.
`(D) ALLOWANCE AGAINST ALTERNATIVE MINIMUM TAX- For purposes of this subsection, rules similar to the rules of subsection (k)(2)(G) shall apply.
`(3) OTHER DEFINITIONS- For purposes of this subsection—
`(A) APPLICABLE DISASTER DATE- The term `applicable disaster date' means, with respect to any federally declared disaster, the date on which such federally declared disaster occurs.
`(B) FEDERALLY DECLARED DISASTER- The term `federally declared disaster' has the meaning given such term under section 165(h)(3)(C)(i).
`(C) DISASTER AREA- The term `disaster area' has the meaning given such term under section 165(h)(3)(C)(ii).
`(D) ELIGIBLE TAXPAYER- The term `eligible taxpayer' means a taxpayer who has suffered an economic loss attributable to a federally declared disaster.
`(4) RECAPTURE- For purposes of this subsection, rules similar to the rules under section 179(d)(10) shall apply with respect to any qualified disaster assistance property which ceases to be qualified disaster assistance property.'.
(b) Effective Date—
The amendment made by this section shall apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2007, with respect disasters declared after such date.
Sec. 711. Increased Expensing For Qualified Disaster Assistance Property.[edit]
(a) In General—
Section 179 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
`(e) Special Rules for Qualified Disaster Assistance Property-
`(1) IN GENERAL- For purposes of this section—
`(A) the dollar amount in effect under subsection (b)(1) for the taxable year shall be increased by the lesser of—
`(i) $100,000, or
`(ii) the cost of qualified section 179 disaster assistance property placed in service during the taxable year, and
`(B) the dollar amount in effect under subsection (b)(2) for the taxable year shall be increased by the lesser of—
`(i) $600,000, or
`(ii) the cost of qualified section 179 disaster assistance property placed in service during the taxable year.
`(2) QUALIFIED SECTION 179 DISASTER ASSISTANCE PROPERTY- For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified section 179 disaster assistance property' means section 179 property (as defined in subsection (d)) which is qualified disaster assistance property (as defined in section 168(n)(2)).
`(3) COORDINATION WITH EMPOWERMENT ZONES AND RENEWAL COMMUNITIES- For purposes of sections 1397A and 1400J, qualified section 179 disaster assistance property shall not be treated as qualified zone property or qualified renewal property, unless the taxpayer elects not to take such qualified section 179 disaster assistance property into account for purposes of this subsection.
`(4) RECAPTURE- For purposes of this subsection, rules similar to the rules under subsection (d)(10) shall apply with respect to any qualified section 179 disaster assistance property which ceases to be qualified section 179 disaster assistance property.'.
(b) Effective Date—
The amendment made by this section shall apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2007, with respect disasters declared after such date.
Sec. 712. Coordination With Heartland Disaster Relief.[edit]
The amendments made by this subtitle, other than the amendments made by sections 706(a)(2), 710, and 711, shall not apply to any disaster described in section 702(c)(1)(A), or to any expenditure or loss resulting from such disaster.
TITLE VIII—SPENDING REDUCTIONS AND APPROPRIATE REVENUE RAISERS FOR NEW TAX RELIEF POLICY[edit]
Sec. 801. Nonqualified Deferred Compensation From Certain Tax Indifferent Parties.[edit]
(a) In General—
Subpart B of part II of subchapter E of chapter 1 is amended by inserting after section 457 the following new section:
`SEC. 457A. NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION FROM CERTAIN TAX INDIFFERENT PARTIES.
`(a) In General- Any compensation which is deferred under a nonqualified deferred compensation plan of a nonqualified entity shall be includible in gross income when there is no substantial risk of forfeiture of the rights to such compensation.
`(b) Nonqualified Entity- For purposes of this section, the term `nonqualified entity' means—
`(1) any foreign corporation unless substantially all of its income is—
`(A) effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business in the United States, or
`(B) subject to a comprehensive foreign income tax, and
`(2) any partnership unless substantially all of its income is allocated to persons other than—
`(A) foreign persons with respect to whom such income is not subject to a comprehensive foreign income tax, and
`(B) organizations which are exempt from tax under this title.
`(c) Determinability of Amounts of Compensation-
`(1) IN GENERAL- If the amount of any compensation is not determinable at the time that such compensation is otherwise includible in gross income under subsection (a)—
`(A) such amount shall be so includible in gross income when determinable, and
`(B) the tax imposed under this chapter for the taxable year in which such compensation is includible in gross income shall be increased by the sum of—
`(i) the amount of interest determined under paragraph (2), and
`(ii) an amount equal to 20 percent of the amount of such compensation.
`(2) INTEREST- For purposes of paragraph (1)(B)(i), the interest determined under this paragraph for any taxable year is the amount of interest at the underpayment rate under section 6621 plus 1 percentage point on the underpayments that would have occurred had the deferred compensation been includible in gross income for the taxable year in which first deferred or, if later, the first taxable year in which such deferred compensation is not subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture.
`(d) Other Definitions and Special Rules- For purposes of this section—
`(1) SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF FORFEITURE-
`(A) IN GENERAL- The rights of a person to compensation shall be treated as subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture only if such person's rights to such compensation are conditioned upon the future performance of substantial services by any individual.
`(B) EXCEPTION FOR COMPENSATION BASED ON GAIN RECOGNIZED ON AN INVESTMENT ASSET-
`(i) IN GENERAL- To the extent provided in regulations prescribed by the Secretary, if compensation is determined solely by reference to the amount of gain recognized on the disposition of an investment asset, such compensation shall be treated as subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture until the date of such disposition.
`(ii) INVESTMENT ASSET- For purposes of clause (i), the term `investment asset' means any single asset (other than an investment fund or similar entity)—
`(I) acquired directly by an investment fund or similar entity,
`(II) with respect to which such entity does not (nor does any person related to such entity) participate in the active management of such asset (or if such asset is an interest in an entity, in the active management of the activities of such entity), and
`(III) substantially all of any gain on the disposition of which (other than such deferred compensation) is allocated to investors in such entity.
`(iii) COORDINATION WITH SPECIAL RULE- Paragraph (3)(B) shall not apply to any compensation to which clause (i) applies.
`(2) COMPREHENSIVE FOREIGN INCOME TAX- The term `comprehensive foreign income tax' means, with respect to any foreign person, the income tax of a foreign country if—
`(A) such person is eligible for the benefits of a comprehensive income tax treaty between such foreign country and the United States, or
`(B) such person demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that such foreign country has a comprehensive income tax.
`(3) NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN-
`(A) IN GENERAL- The term `nonqualified deferred compensation plan' has the meaning given such term under section 409A(d), except that such term shall include any plan that provides a right to compensation based on the appreciation in value of a specified number of equity units of the service recipient.
`(B) EXCEPTION- Compensation shall not be treated as deferred for purposes of this section if the service provider receives payment of such compensation not later than 12 months after the end of the taxable year of the service recipient during which the right to the payment of such compensation is no longer subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture.
`(4) EXCEPTION FOR CERTAIN COMPENSATION WITH RESPECT TO EFFECTIVELY CONNECTED INCOME- In the case a foreign corporation with income which is taxable under section 882, this section shall not apply to compensation which, had such compensation had been paid in cash on the date that such compensation ceased to be subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture, would have been deductible by such foreign corporation against such income.
`(5) APPLICATION OF RULES- Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (5) and (6) of section 409A(d) shall apply.
`(e) Regulations- The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this section, including regulations disregarding a substantial risk of forfeiture in cases where necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.'.
(b) Conforming Amendment—
Section 26(b)(2), as amended by the Housing Assistance Tax Act of 2008, is amended by striking `and' at the end of subparagraph (V), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (W) and inserting `, and', and by adding at the end the following new subparagraph:
`(X) section 457A(c)(1)(B) (relating to determinability of amounts of compensation).'.
(c) Clerical Amendment—
The table of sections of subpart B of part II of subchapter E of chapter 1 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 457 the following new item:
`Sec. 457A. Nonqualified deferred compensation from certain tax indifferent parties.'.
(d) Effective Date—
(1) IN GENERAL—
Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts deferred which are attributable to services performed after December 31, 2008.
(2) APPLICATION TO EXISTING DEFERRALS—
In the case of any amount deferred to which the amendments made by this section do not apply solely by reason of the fact that the amount is attributable to services performed before January 1, 2009, to the extent such amount is not includible in gross income in a taxable year beginning before 2018, such amounts shall be includible in gross income in the later of—
(A) the last taxable year beginning before 2018, or
(B) the taxable year in which there is no substantial risk of forfeiture of the rights to such compensation (determined in the same manner as determined for purposes of section 457A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by this section).
(3) ACCELERATED PAYMENTS—
No later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall issue guidance providing a limited period of time during which a nonqualified deferred compensation arrangement attributable to services performed on or before December 31, 2008, may, without violating the requirements of section 409A(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, be amended to conform the date of distribution to the date the amounts are required to be included in income.
(4) CERTAIN BACK-TO-BACK ARRANGEMENTS—
If the taxpayer is also a service recipient and maintains one or more nonqualified deferred compensation arrangements for its service providers under which any amount is attributable to services performed on or before December 31, 2008, the guidance issued under paragraph (4) shall permit such arrangements to be amended to conform the dates of distribution under such arrangement to the date amounts are required to be included in the income of such taxpayer under this subsection.
(5) ACCELERATED PAYMENT NOT TREATED AS MATERIAL MODIFICATION—
Any amendment to a nonqualified deferred compensation arrangement made pursuant to paragraph (4) or (5) shall not be treated as a material modification of the arrangement for purposes of section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1434
Cached time: 20221005184027
Cache expiry: 1814400
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐page‐id, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.140 seconds
Real time usage: 0.167 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1106/1000000
Post‐expand include size: 46244/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 20907/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 10/100
Expensive parser function count: 0/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 0/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.030/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 1467551/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/400
Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%   77.136      1 -total
 80.73%   62.272      1 Template:Header
  8.81%    6.793      2 Template:Section
  7.06%    5.447      1 Template:Header/main_block
  6.24%    4.815      9 Template:USStat
  5.15%    3.970      1 Template:UC
  2.24%    1.729      1 Template:USPL
  2.22%    1.714      6 Template:PL-indent
 Saved in parser cache with key enwikisource:pcache:idhash:409814-0!canonical and timestamp 20221005184027 and revision id 4426901.
Retrieved from "https://en.wikisource.org/w/index.php?title=Tax_Extenders_and_Alternative_Minimum_Tax_Relief_Act_of_2008&oldid=4426901"
Category: United States federal lawHidden categories: Pages with override authorPages with explicit formatting in header fields
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in
Namespaces
PageDiscussion
English
Views
ReadEditView history
More
Search
Navigation
Main PageCommunity portalCentral discussionRecent changesSubject indexAuthorsRandom workRandom authorRandom transcriptionHelpDonate
Display Options
Tools
What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this pageWikidata item
Download/print
Printable versionDownload EPUBDownload MOBIDownload PDFOther formats
In other languages
Add links
 This page was last edited on 9 May 2013, at 06:14.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
Privacy policy
About Wikisource
Disclaimers
Mobile view
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement

=========
